“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”
HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT

2 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Amnesty International is a global movement of more than 7 million
people who campaign for a world where human rights are enjoyed
by all. We reach almost every country in the world and have more
than 2 million members and supporters who drive forward our fight
for rights, as well as more than 5 million activists who strengthen
our calls for justice.
Our vision is for every person to enjoy all the rights enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international
human rights standards. We are independent of any government,
political ideology, economic interest or religion and are funded
mainly by our membership and public donations.
First published in 2016 by
Amnesty International Ltd
Peter Benenson House
1 Easton Street
London WC1X 0DW
United Kingdom
© Amnesty International 2016
Index: AFR 62/3183/2016
Original Language: English
Printed by Amnesty International,
International Secretariat, United Kingdom
All rights reserved. This publication is copyright, but may
be reproduced by any method without fee for advocacy,
campaigning and teaching purposes, but not for resale.
The copyright holders request that all such use be
registered with them for impact assessment purposes. For
copying in any other circumstances, or for reuse in other
publications, or for translation or adaptation, prior written
permission must be obtained from the publishers, and a
fee may be payable.
To request permission, or for any other inquiries, please
contact copyright@amnesty.org
Cover photo: Charles, 13 years old, works with his father in the afternoons and goes to school in
the morning when he has the money. Charles sorts and washes the minerals, before helping to
transport them to a nearby trading house, which buys the ore, May 2015. © Amnesty International
and Afrewatch
amnesty.org
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 3
CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 4
METHODOLOGY 12
1. BACKGROUND: ARTISANAL COBALT MINING IN THE DRC 14
Cobalt Mining in the DRC 15
The Rise of Artisanal Mining in Katanga 16
Government Regulation of Artisanal Mining 17
Global Trade 18
2. HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN ARTISANAL COBALT MINING 19
i. Hazardous Working Conditions in Artisanal Cobalt Mines 19
ii. Children in Artisanal Cobalt Mining 28
iii. Failure of the DRC Government to Protect People from Human Rights Abuses 33
3. DUE DILIGENCE: A CORPORATE INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARD 40
4. THE COBALT SUPPLY CHAIN: ABSENCE OF DUE DILIGENCE FROM MINE TO MARKETPLACE 46
i. Upstream 48
ii. Downstream 54
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 67
Annex 71
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

4 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
These artisanal miners, referred to as creuseurs in
the DRC, mine by hand using the most basic tools to
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
dig out rocks from tunnels deep underground. Artisanal
miners include children as young as seven who
scavenge for rocks containing cobalt in the discarded
by-products of industrial mines, and who wash and
People around the world increasingly rely on
sort the ore before it is sold.
rechargeable batteries to power their mobile phones,
tablets, laptop computers and other portable electronic
This report, jointly researched by Amnesty International
devices. The growing global market for portable
and African Resources Watch (Afrewatch), examines
electronic devices and rechargeable batteries is
the conditions under which artisanal miners extract a
driving the growing demand for the extraction of
significant proportion of the world’s cobalt supply,
cobalt, a key component in lithium-ion rechargeable
and then traces how this mineral is traded. It is
batteries.
the first comprehensive account of how cobalt from
the DRC’s artisanal mines enters the supply chain
More than half of the world’s total supply of cobalt
of multinational companies, including some of the
comes from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
world’s wealthiest electronics companies. The report
(DRC). According to the government’s own estimates,
20% of the cobalt currently exported from the DRC assesses the extent to which companies have put
comes from artisanal miners in the southern part of in place human rights due diligence measures to
the country. There are approximately 110,000 to know where the cobalt in their products comes from
150,000 artisanal miners in this region, who work and the conditions under which it is extracted and
alongside much larger industrial operations. traded.
Charles, 13 years old, goes to school in the mornings, when his father can afford it. Every afternoon he sorts and washes the minerals, before helping to
transport them to a nearby trading house, May 2015. (Still taken from footage shot by Amnesty International). © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 5
THE RISE OF ARTISANAL MINING example, the adults and children who handpick
stones on or near the surface of industrial mining
IN SOUTHERN DRC
concessions work for themselves. They sell the ore to
traders or intermediaries. By contrast, some miners
The DRC is one of the poorest countries in the world who dig underground do so as hired labourers, earning
and has suffered from decades of war and poor a fee from the owner of the land where they work,
governance. Artisanal mining became a source of while others work in teams or share their earnings
livelihood for many people when the largest state with mine owners. Some miners also have a business
owned mining company collapsed in the 1990s. It arrangement with an investor, who funds the digging
grew further during the Second Congo War (1998 – of the tunnel and manages the sale of the product.
2003), when President Laurent Kabila encouraged
people to dig for themselves as the government
could not revive industrial mining. HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN
ARTISANAL COBALT MINES
In 2002, the government published a new mining
code in an attempt to revive the mining sector
and attract foreign investment. The Mining Code Amnesty International and Afrewatch conducted
established that artisanal mining can only take place research in artisanal mining areas in southern DRC
within authorized Zones d’exploitation artisanale in April and May 2015, visiting five mine sites. They
(Artisanal Mining Zones or ZEAs) where industrial interviewed nearly 90 people who work, or who have
or semi-industrial mining is not viable. Artisanal worked, in the mines, including 17 children.
miners were driven out of many mining sites which
were made available to major western and Chinese Chronic exposure to dust containing cobalt can result
companies. However, as the government has created in a potentially fatal lung disease, called “hard metal
very few ZEAs in southern DRC, most artisanal miners lung disease.” Inhalation of cobalt particles can also
end up working in unauthorized and unregulated cause “respiratory sensitization, asthma, shortness
areas or trespassing on land controlled by industrial of breath, and decreased pulmonary function”,
mining companies. and sustained skin contact with cobalt can lead
to dermatitis. Yet researchers found that the vast
Artisanal miners in the DRC work in a range of different majority of miners, who spend long hours every day
ways and locations to mine cobalt. In some places, working with cobalt, do not have the most basic of
the miners dig deep underground to access the ore. protective equipment, such as gloves, work clothes
These miners, who are mainly adult men work or facemasks. The DRC Mining Code (2002) and
underground in tunnels and use chisels, mallets and Regulations (2003) provide no guidance for artisanal
other hand tools. In other places, miners, including miners on safety equipment or how to handle
many children, dig for cobalt in the discarded tailings substances which may pose a danger to human
(by-products such as rocks left over from mining and health, apart from mercury.
refining processes) of the region’s many industrial
mines. They collect rocks containing minerals that Many of the miners complained that they coughed
lie on or near the surface, most often without the a lot or had problems with their lungs. Researchers
companies’ permission. The stones they pick are also spoke to women who complained of respiratory
then washed, sifted and sorted in streams and lakes problems and pain as a result of carrying heavy loads
close to the mines. Generally, women and children and the physically demanding nature of the work. For
are involved in washing and sorting the ore. example, one woman described having to carry 50
kg sacks of cobalt ore and told researchers: “We all
The way these artisanal mining operations are have problems with our lungs, and pain all over our
managed and organised varies from site to site. For bodies.”
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

6 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Artisanal miners work in mines which they dig Most children indicated that they earned between
themselves. Hand-dug mines can extend for tens 1,000-2,000 Congolese Francs per day (US$1-2).
of metres underground, often without any support Children who collected, sorted, washed, crushed
to hold them up, and are poorly ventilated. There is and transported minerals were paid per sack of
no official data available on the number of fatalities minerals by the traders. The children had no way
that occur, but miners said accidents are common, of independently verifying the weight of the sacks
as unsupported tunnels collapse frequently. Between or the grade of the ore, and so had to accept what
September 2014 and December 2015 alone, the the traders paid them, making them susceptible to
DRC’s UN-run radio station, Radio Okapi, carried exploitation.
reports of fatal accidents involving more than 80
artisanal miners in the former province of Katanga. It is widely recognized internationally that the
However, the true figure is likely to be far higher as involvement of children in mining constitutes one of
many accidents go unrecorded and bodies are left the worst forms of child labour, which governments
buried underground. are required to prohibit and eliminate. The nature of
the work that researchers found that the children do
UNICEF estimated in 2014 that approximately in artisanal cobalt mining in the DRC is hazardous,
40,000 boys and girls work in all the mines across and likely to harm children’s health and safety.
southern DRC, many of them involved in cobalt
The children said that they had to work, since their
mining. The children interviewed by researchers
parents had no formal employment and could not
described the physically demanding nature of the
afford school fees. The DRC Child Protection Code
work they did. They said that they worked for up to
(2009), provides for free and compulsory primary
12 hours a day in the mines, carrying heavy loads, to
education for all children. However, because of
earn between one and two dollars a day. Even those
a lack of adequate funding from the state, most
children who went to school worked 10 – 12 hours
schools still charge parents a monthly amount to
during the weekend and school holidays, and in the
cover costs, such as teacher salaries, uniforms and
time before and after school. The children who were
learning materials. In Kolwezi, NGO staff told
not attending school worked in the mines all year
researchers, this amount varies between 10 - 30,000
round. For example, Paul, aged 14, started mining
Congolese Francs (US$10-30) per month, which
at the age of 12 and worked in tunnels underground.
is more than many can afford. Some children do
He told researchers he would often “spend 24 hours
not attend school and work full time, others attend
down in the tunnels. I arrived in the morning and
school but work out of school hours, on weekends
would leave the following morning.”
and holidays.
Other children said that they worked in the open,
in high temperatures, or in the rain. As with adult
miners, they were exposed to high levels of cobalt on
a consistent basis, but did not even have gloves or
face masks to wear. The children interviewed for this
report complained of being frequently ill. “There is
lots of dust, it is very easy to catch colds, and we hurt
all over,” Dany, a 15-year-old boy, told researchers.
Several children said that they had been beaten,
or seen other children beaten, by security guards
Miners use chisels, mallets and other hand tools to mine for cobalt ore
employed by mining companies when they trespassed tens of metres under the ground in Kasulo, a residential neighbourhood
of Kolwezi, May 2015. (Still taken from footage shot by a miner using
on those companies’ mining concessions. Security a GoPro camera for Amnesty International) © Amnesty International and
Afrewatch
guards also demanded money from them.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 7
DRC’S FAILURE TO PROTECT NGOs and others for its failure to put in place an
adequate labour inspection system, to remove
PEOPLE FROM HUMAN RIGHTS
children from the worst forms of child labour, and
ABUSES
to prioritize primary school enrolment. In 2011, the
DRC developed a national action plan to eliminate
There are significant gaps and weaknesses in the the worst forms of child labour by 2020, but four
government’s regulation of artisanal mining. The years later the plan is yet to be officially adopted.
Mining Code and Regulations contain limited guidance
on health and safety and very few provisions to protect The Service d’Assistance et d’Encadrement du Small
artisanal miners’ labour rights. Scale Mining (SAESSCAM), the governmental agency
created in 1999 to regulate artisanal mining and
There is a significant lack of capacity within
improve conditions for artisanal miners, only operates
governmental agencies to monitor and enforce
in ZEAs (authorized artisanal mining areas). Even
safeguards and improve conditions for artisanal
government officials interviewed for this report
miners. The Ministry of Labour is responsible for
acknowledged that there were not enough ZEAs to
ensuring effective implementation of the DRC Labour
accommodate the number of artisanal miners in
Code, including inspecting worksites for child labour
southern DRC. The vast majority of artisanal mining
and ensuring that they abide by health and safety
therefore takes places in unauthorized mining areas,
rules. However in 2014, the Ministry only employed
20 inspectors for the entire mining region of southern where the government is doing next to nothing to
DRC. The government has been criticised by UN regulate the safety and labour conditions in which
human rights monitoring bodies, ILO expert bodies, the miners work.
Artisanal miners hold up handfuls of cobalt ore (left) and copper ore (right) that they have scavenged from the mounds of tailings from active and inactive
industrial mine sites near Lake Malo, Kapata on the outskirts of Kolwezi, in the DRC. The miners must then sort, wash and crush the mineral ore before
selling it to buying houses, May 2015. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

8 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Not only are state officials aware of the mining the world’s largest manufacturers of cobalt products.
activities taking place in unauthorized locations, Operating in the DRC since 2006, CDM buys cobalt
but they also financially benefit from them. Officials from traders, who buy directly from the miners. CDM
from a range of different government and security then smelts the ore at its plant in the DRC before
agencies control access to unauthorized mining sites exporting it to China. There, Huayou Cobalt further
and demand illegal payments from artisanal miners. smelts and sells the processed cobalt to battery
During their visits, researchers saw officials wearing component manufacturers in China and South Korea.
uniforms and others who identified themselves as In turn, these companies sell to battery manufacturers,
working for governmental agencies at three unauthorized which then sell on to well-known consumer brands.
mining sites. In Kasulo, they saw uniformed police
and were approached by two men out of uniform, Using public records, including investor documents
and one in uniform, who said that they were members and statements published on company websites,
of the mines police. These men told the researchers researchers identified battery component manufacturers
to leave the area as foreigners were not allowed to who were listed as sourcing processed ore from
visit mines sites without official permission, and Huayou Cobalt. They then went on to trace companies
demanded that the researchers pay a fine. Artisanal who were listed as customers of the battery component
miners at these and other sites complained that the manufacturers, in order to establish how the cobalt ends
mines police and other officials demand payments up in consumer products. In seeking to understand
from them for each sack of ore or to work on the site. how this international supply chain works, as well as
to ask questions about each company’s due diligence
A Ministry of Mines official confirmed to researchers policy, Amnesty International wrote to Huayou Cobalt
that none of these agencies are authorized to collect and 25 other companies in China, Germany, Japan,
payments (referred to in the mining areas as “taxes”) South Korea, Taiwan, UK, and the USA. These
from artisanal miners. The evidence suggests that companies include some of the world’s largest and
the state officials are extorting illegal payments from
artisanal miners, while turning a blind eye to the
unsafe conditions in which miners work that breach
DRC’s own laws, including the prohibition on child
labour in mines.
THE GLOBAL COBALT SUPPLY
CHAIN
Researchers followed vehicles of miners and traders
as they carried cobalt ore from artisanal mines in
Kolwezi to a market at Musompo, where minerals
are traded. Independent traders at Musompo – most
of them Chinese – buy the ore, regardless of where
it has come from or how it has been mined. In turn,
these traders sell the ore on to larger companies
in the DRC which process and export it. One of
the largest companies at the centre of this trade is
About 100 people, mainly women, many with babies and infants, were
Congo Dongfang Mining International (CDM). CDM is
working in the waters and on the shore of Lake Malo, Kapata, when
a 100% owned subsidiary of China-based Zhejiang researchers visited. One woman said that she washed eight to twelve
sacks of 50 kg per day, for which she earned 1,500 Congolese francs
Huayou Cobalt Company Ltd (Huayou Cobalt), one of (around US$1.50), May 2015. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 9
best known consumer electronics companies, including (including whether human rights abuses or any form
Apple Inc., Dell, HP Inc. (formerly Hewlett-Packard of illegality are taking place). Amnesty International
Company), Huawei, Lenovo (Motorola), LG, Microsoft and Afrewatch conclude from Huayou Cobalt’s
Corporation, Samsung, Sony and Vodafone, as well response that it was failing to take these crucial
as vehicle manufacturers like Daimler AG, Volkswagen steps and carry out due diligence in line with the
and Chinese firm BYD. Their replies are detailed in OECD Guidance, which has been accepted by the
the report’s Annex. Chinese Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals
& Chemicals Importers & Exporters. It is failing to
respect human rights and there is a high risk that
COMPANIES’ FAILURE TO MEET Huayou Cobalt is buying (and subsequently selling)
cobalt from artisanal mines in which children and
INTERNATIONAL DUE DILIGENCE
adults work in hazardous conditions.
STANDARDS
Any company which sources processed ore, and its
customers along the supply chain, referred to as
The UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human
“downstream” companies, should be able to trace
Rights set out the responsibility of companies to
its suppliers up to the smelters (such as CDM and
respect international human rights in their global
Huayou Cobalt), and should be fully aware of the
operations, including in their supply chains. This
due diligence practices of the smelter company. In
requires, amongst other things, that companies carry
their letters to Amnesty International, most of these
out human rights due diligence “to identify, prevent,
downstream companies referred to general codes
mitigate and account for how they address their
of conduct and internal policies, which require
impacts on human rights.”
suppliers to respect human rights and not employ
children. Many of these companies stated that they
A practical guide for how such due diligence should
have a zero tolerance policy when it comes to child
be carried out for supply chains has been provided
labour in their supply chains. However, they did not
by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
provide details of specific investigations and checks
Development (OECD). Its Due Diligence Guidance for
that they have undertaken to identify and address
Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-
child labour in their cobalt supply chains. None of
Affected and High-Risk Areas (OECD Guidance), lays
the companies said that they had been in touch with
out a five step process for all companies involved
Huayou Cobalt, prior to receiving our letter.
in the mineral supply chain to follow. Companies
that purchase cobalt, or components containing the
Many companies denied sourcing cobalt from the
mineral, have no excuse for not conducting such due
DRC and/or Huayou Cobalt – though they are listed
diligence steps. The DRC is by far the world’s largest
as customers in documents of other companies who
source of cobalt, and the poor conditions of its artisanal
are listed as buying from Huayou Cobalt – but did
mines, and the presence of children working in them,
not explain whom they sourced cobalt from. Con-
has been reported publicly in the past.
sidering the predominance of cobalt from the DRC
in the global market, it is unlikely that all these
Research for this report demonstrates that companies large companies are not sourcing any cobalt from
along the cobalt supply chain are failing to conduct the DRC. Downstream companies should already be
adequate human rights due diligence. As the smelter, publicly disclosing who their smelters are, as well as
CDM and Huayou Cobalt are at a critical point in their due diligence practices. However, none provided
the supply chain and are expected to know how the enough detail for Amnesty International to be able to
cobalt that they buy is extracted, handled, transported verify their cobalt supply chain or whether they were
and traded. They should be able to identify where undertaking all five steps of the OECD Guidance in
it is mined, by whom and under what conditions relation to cobalt.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

10 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Most of the consumer brands identified in Huayou The government of the DRC should create more ZEAs
Cobalt’s supply chain have a global presence. For and regularise unauthorized mining areas, wherever
them, supply chain due diligence requirements for this is possible. It should extend and enforce labour
all minerals – as laid out by the OECD Guidance – and safety protections, and provide support in
are not new. Additionally, many of them are US-listed realising these protections, to all artisanal miners. It
companies subject to reporting requirements under urgently needs to put in place an adequate system to
the Dodd-Frank Act, which requires them to check monitor and enforce the labour standards that exist,
including on the worst forms of child labour. The
whether certain minerals in their products (tin,
government must also ensure that all children are
tantalum, tungsten and gold) are contributing to the
able to access free and compulsory primary education
funding of armed groups or fuelling human rights
and provide support, as necessary, to reintegrate
abuses in the DRC or surrounding countries. Yet it is
children who have been removed from the worst
clear that these companies are currently failing to
forms of child labour into the school system.
operationalise the OECD’s five step due diligence
process beyond whatever measures they have put
Companies in the cobalt supply chain should undertake
in place for 3T and gold. One company explicitly
and publicly disclose their due diligence practices.
admitted and others implied that this is because
Companies also have a responsibility to undertake
cobalt is not covered under US legislation, clearly
remedial action if human rights abuses have occurred
underscoring the value of law in influencing corporate
at any point in an existing or past supply chain. The
behaviour.
company must, in cooperation with other relevant
actors, such as its suppliers and national authorities,
remediate the harm suffered by people whose human
CONCLUSIONS
rights have been abused.
The research in this report exposes a clear gap
when it comes to home states (the countries where
multinational companies are headquartered), such
as China, US, South Korea and many others, playing
a meaningful role and requiring greater transparency
around cobalt supply chain practices. Currently, no
country legally requires companies to publicly report
on their cobalt supply chains.
Under international human rights law, states have
a duty to protect against human rights abuses by all
actors, including businesses. This requires all Miners use chisels, mallets and other hand tools to mine for cobalt ore
tens of metres under the ground in Kasulo, a residential neighbourhood
governments to enact and enforce laws requiring
of Kolwezi, May 2015. (Still taken from footage shot by a miner using
corporate due diligence and public disclosure in a GoPro camera for Amnesty International) © Amnesty International and
Afrewatch
relation to cobalt and other minerals.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 11
Provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo pre-2015
Provinces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo pre-2015
AFRICA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SOUTH SUDAN
UGANDA
CONGO
RWANDA
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
BURUNDI
TANZANIA
FORMER KATANGA PROVINCE
ANGOLA
ZAMBIA
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

12 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
abuses in the natural resources sector and supports
communities affected by large-scale mining projects.2
METHODOLOGY
Amnesty International and Afrewatch conducted
research in southern DRC in April and May 2015.
The primary focus was on mining and trading
activities in Kolwezi, the centre of artisanal cobalt
This report is the product of joint research by Amnesty
mining in the region, and the location of the Musompo
International and African Resources Watch (Afrewatch).
minerals market. Researchers also investigated
Amnesty International has been investigating human
conditions in two other mining towns, Kambove and
rights abuses in the DRC’s copper and cobalt mines
Likasi, and met officials in what was then the provincial
since 2011.1 Afrewatch is a non-governmental capital of Katanga, Lubumbashi. In July 2015 the
organization that is based in the Democratic Republic government created a new provincial structure for
New provinces created in 2015 from the former Katanga Province
of the Congo (DRC). It investigates human rights the country and Katanga was divided into four.3
New provinces created in 2015 from the former Katanga Province
D.R.C
TANGANIKA
HAUT-LOMAMI
FORMER KATANGA PROVINCE
LUALABA
HAUT-KATANGA
Kolwezi
Kambove
Likasi
Lumbumbashi
1. See previous Amnesty International reports: Bulldozed: how a mining company buried the truth about forced evictions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, 2014, https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2014/11/drc-belgian-mining-giant-lied-over-bulldozing-homes/, and Profits and Loss: Mining
and human rights in Katanga, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2013, https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/AFR62/001/2013/en.
2. See Afrewatch homepage http://www.afrewatch.org/.
3. In June 2015 the government subdivided the DRC’s existing 11 provinces into 26. The southern section of Katanga province, through which the
Copperbelt runs, was divided into the new provinces of Haut-Katanga and Lualaba. The research for this report was conducted before these provinces
were created and so the area of research is referred to as Katanga throughout. See Radio Okapi, Découpage territorial : procédures d’installation de
nouvelles provinces, 13 July 2015, http://www.radiookapi.net/actualite/2015/07/13/decoupage-territorial-procedures-dinstallation-de-nouvelles-provinc-
es (accessed 15 December 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 13
Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers to take part. Their names have been changed in this
visited two mining sites in Kolwezi and one in Kambove. report to protect their identities.
Afrewatch researchers visited a further mining site in
Kolwezi and one in Likasi. Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers
collected photographic and video evidence, including
Researchers interviewed 87 people who work, or of children working and of conditions inside a mine.
who have worked in the mines. They interviewed 17
children, aged 9 to 17, and 53 adult men and
Several DRC government officials were contacted but
women who work as artisanal miners or in collecting,
said they were unavailable for meetings, including
washing and sorting minerals. Researchers also
the Mayor of Kolwezi, the head of the Service
spoke to 18 people who trade in cobalt or who work
d’Assistance et d’Encadrement du Small Scale
for a company that does. They interviewed two
Mining (SAESSCAM) in Kolwezi, and officials at the
businessmen who own trading companies in Musompo
provincial government in Lubumbashi.
and members of staff from those and two other trading
companies. They also interviewed representatives of
Researchers tracked the cobalt as it is traded in the
artisanal miners’ co-operatives, government officials,
DRC and exported to China. Using public records,
and members of civil society and non-governmental
including investor documents and statements
organisations (NGOs) working with women and children.
published on company websites, Amnesty International
identified companies in the supply chain in order to
Researchers conducted most of the interviews in
establish how the cobalt ends up in consumer
Swahili and the rest in French. Most interviews took
products. In seeking to understand how this
place in private. In many cases interviewees did not
international supply chain works, as well as to ask
want to be identified, and their names have been
questions about each company’s due diligence policy,
changed in this report to protect their identities. The
Amnesty International wrote to 26 companies in
interviews with people working in the mines, and
China, Germany, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, UK,
representatives of co-operatives, were conducted in
groups of up to ten people. and the USA. The replies are summarised in a table
in the report annexe.
Staff from two charitable organisations arranged for
Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers to The researchers would like to thank the many
interview former or current child workers.4 Researchers individuals and organizations in the DRC and
conducted all interviews in small groups, and with elsewhere who agreed to be interviewed for this
the presence of NGO staff. All of the children agreed report or helped in other ways.
4. “Les Soeurs de Bon Pasteur”, in Kolwezi and “Centre de Rattrapage Réconfort” in Kambove.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

14 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
their bare hands, and only the most rudimentary of
tools, to dig out or collect rock containing minerals
1. BACKGROUND:
(i.e. ore).6
ARTISANAL COBALT
Artisanal miners in the DRC work in a range of
MINING IN THE DRC different ways and locations to mine cobalt. There,
cobalt is generally found in a dark grey rock known
as heterogenite. Cobalt can also be extracted from
other ores that miners collect primarily for their
This chapter outlines what is meant by “artisanal copper content, and that are then processed.7 In
mining,” why it is so widely practiced in southern some places, the miners dig deep underground to
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and how access the ore. These miners, who are mainly adult
the government attempts to regulate it. men and are known in the DRC as creuseurs, work
underground in tunnels and use chisels, mallets and
In the DRC, artisanal mining is widely understood to other hand tools. They fill sacks with the ore, which
mean “mining by hand.”5 Whereas industrial mining are then tied to ropes and pulled by hand out of the
operations involve machinery, artisanal miners use mine shafts, which can be tens of metres deep.
Miners use chisels, mallets and other hand tools to mine for cobalt ore tens of metres under the ground in Kasulo, a residential neighbourhood of Kol-
wezi, May 2015. (Still taken from footage shot by a miner using a GoPro camera for Amnesty International) © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
5. There is no common international definition of artisanal mining. See Thomas Hentschel, Felix Hruschka and Michael Priester, Artisanal and Small-
Scale Mining: Challenges and Opportunities, International Institute for Environment and Development and World Business Council for Sustainable
Development, 2003, p. 5, available at: http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/9268IIED.pdf. “Broadly speaking, artisanal and small-scale mining refers to mining
by individuals, groups, families or cooperatives with minimal or no mechanization, often in the informal (illegal) sector of the market. Despite many
attempts, a common definition of ASM has yet to be established. In some countries a distinction is made between ‘artisanal mining’ that is purely
manual and on a very small scale, and ‘small-scale mining’ that has some mechanization and is on a larger scale.”
6. For descriptions and analysis of artisanal mining in the DRC see Daniel Rothenberg and Ben Radley, We miners take our lives in our hands, save noth-
ing, and believe only in luck: The lived experience of human rights and labour violations in select artisanal mining sites in North and South Kivu, Arizo-
na State University, 2014 (Daniel Rothenberg and Ben Radley, We miners take our lives in our hands). Pact Inc., PROMINES Study: Artisanal Mining
in the Democratic Republic of Congo, 2010, available at http://congomines.org/system/attachments/assets/000/000/349/original/PACT-2010-Promines-
StudyArtisanalMiningDRC.pdf, (accessed 6 January 2016) (Pact Inc., PROMINES Study) and Nicholas Tsurukawa, et al., Social impacts of artisanal
cobalt mining in Katanga, Democratic Republic of Congo, Öko Institut, 2011, available at http://www.oeko.de/oekodoc/1294/2011-419-en.pdf
(accessed 9 October 2015) (Nicholas Tsurukawa, et al., Social impacts of artisanal cobalt mining in Katanga).
7. Email from Kim Shedd, Mineral Commodity Specialist, U.S. Geological Survey, 7 October 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 15
In other places, miners, including many children, dig lie on or near the surface, most often without the
for cobalt in the discarded tailings (by-products such companies’ permission. The stones they pick are
as rocks left over from mining and refining processes) then washed, sifted and sorted in streams and lakes
of the region’s many active and inactive industrial close to the mines. Many women and children are
mines. They collect rocks containing minerals that involved in washing and sorting the ore.
An artisanal miner sorts cobalt ore on the shore of Lake Malo, Kapata, on the outskirts of Kolwezi, DRC. Despite the health risks of exposure to cobalt the
miner is not wearing a facemask, gloves or any protective clothing, May 2015 © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
The way these artisanal mining operations are managed COBALT MINING IN THE DRC
and organised varies from site to site.8 For example,
the adults and children who handpick stones on or
The DRC is, by far, the single most important source
near the surface of industrial mining concessions
of cobalt in the world. In 2014, half of the world’s
work for themselves. By contrast, some miners who
cobalt, which is used in the lithium-ion rechargeable
dig underground do so as hired labourers, earning
batteries that power electronic devices such as
a fee from the owner of the land where they work.
laptops and smartphones, was mined in the DRC.9
In other cases, artisanal miners are self-employed,
working in teams, and sharing their earnings with Demand for cobalt is growing at over 5 percent a
mine owners. Some miners also have a business year, and it is expected to continue doing so as the
arrangement with an investor, who funds the digging lithium-ion battery market expands with the increasing
of the tunnel, and manages the sale of the product. popularity of electric vehicles.10
8. Information based on multiple interviews with miners and businessmen who have invested in artisanal mines in Kolwezi, Kambove and Likasi, May
2015. See also Pact Inc., PROMINES Study.
9. The US Geological Survey (USGS), Mineral Commodity Summary: Cobalt 2015, available at minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/cobalt/
mcs-2015-cobal.pdf (accessed 9 October 2015) (USGS Minerals, Mineral Commodity Summary: Cobalt 2015).
10. The Cobalt Development Institute, Cobalt News July 2015, p5, available at http://www.thecdi.com/cdi/images/news_pdf/15-3_cobalt_news.pdf (ac-
cessed 9 October 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

16 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Cobalt is mined alongside copper in the south of the create alternative sources of employment.15 At its
DRC, in Lualaba and Haut Katanga provinces (in peak in the 1970s and 80s, the state mining company,
what was known until recently as Katanga province).11 the Générale des Carrières et des Mines S.A. (Gécamines)
This region, bordering Zambia, has always been the employed some 34,000 workers, ran farms, hospitals
DRC’s most significant mining area, but the nature and schools for their benefit, and was the largest
of operations has changed dramatically over time. contributor to the state treasury.16 As the regime of
When they were developed in the early 1900s, the
President Mobutu Sese Seko collapsed in the early
mines were large-scale industrial operations, managed
1990s, so did Gécamines. The company stopped
by a single company. Today, industrial copper and
paying salaries, and employees were forced to fend
cobalt mines are operated by a range of different
for themselves, looting its assets by “cannibalizing
Congolese and international firms. Running alongside
mining apparatus, sending truckloads of spare parts,
them are many artisanal and non-industrial mining
equipment and ore concentrates to South Africa.”17
operations.12
From 1998 to 2003, the country was engulfed by a
The scale of these artisanal mining activities is
second war, as Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi sought
substantial. The government estimates that 20% of
to overthrow Mobutu’s successor, Laurent Kabila.18
the cobalt currently exported from the DRC comes
With little chance of reviving the industrial mining
from Katanga’s artisanal miners.13 A study for the
sector while fighting continued, Kabila encouraged
DRC government estimated that there are some
the inhabitants of the mine towns to dig for
110,000 regular artisanal miners in Katanga, rising
themselves.19 Thousands of adults and children,
to about 150,000 on a seasonal basis.14
using only hand tools, started mining in the Gécamines
concessions. In 1999, Kabila established a government
agency to regulate, and tax, this growing sector.20
THE RISE OF ARTISANAL MINING
The Service d’Assistance et d’Encadrement du Small
IN KATANGA
Scale Mining (SAESSCAM) remains the key government
body charged with overseeing artisanal mining (see
The scale of artisanal cobalt mining has been below).
ascribed to the government’s chronic mismanagement
of the economy over several decades, as it bankrupted In 2002, the government published a new mining
its most important mining company and failed to code.21 The aim was to revive the mining sector by
11. In June 2015 the government subdivided the DRC’s existing 11 provinces into 26. The southern section of Katanga province, through which the Cop-
perbelt runs, was divided into the new provinces of Haut-Katanga and Lualaba. The research for this report was conducted before these provinces were
created and so the area of research is referred to as Katanga throughout. See Radio Okapi, Découpage territorial : procédures d’installation de nouvelles
provinces, 13 July 2015, available at http://www.radiookapi.net/actualite/2015/07/13/decoupage-territorial-procedures-dinstallation-de-nouvelles-prov-
inces (accessed 15 December 2015).
12. USGS, 2012 Minerals yearbook: Cobalt, p. 19.4, available at http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/cobalt/myb1-2012-cobal.pdf (accessed
9 October 2015) (USGS, 2012 Minerals yearbook).
13. Amnesty International interview with head of Service d’Assistance et d’Encadrement du Small-Scale Mining (SAESSCAM) in Katanga, Lubumbashi,
May 18, 2015.
14. These figures included miners operating in the north of the province, as well as in the southern “Copperbelt”. It is not clear if they also included wom-
en and children involved in the processing of ore, but not in the actual mining. Pact Inc, PROMINES Study, p. 21.
15. See Jason Stearns, Dancing in the Glory of Monsters, New York: PublicAffairs, 2011, p. 289 (Jason Stearns, Dancing in the Glory of Monsters).
16. See Gécamines, Notre Histoire, available at http://gecamines.cd/html/histoire.html (accessed June 8, 2015), and Jason Stearns, Dancing in the Glory
of Monsters, p. 289.
17. James C. McKinley, Jr, Zairian Rebels’ New Allies: Men Armed With Briefcases, The New York Times, 17 April 1997, http://www.nytimes.
com/1997/04/17/world/zairian-rebels-new-allies-men-armed-with-briefcases.html (accessed June 8, 2015). See also B. Rubbers, The Collapse of
Gecamines, Cahiers d’études Africaines, 2006/1 (No 181), http://www.cairn.info/article.php?ID_ARTICLE=CEA_181_0115.
18. See Georges Nzongola-Ntalaja, The Congo from Leopold to Kabila, London: Zed Books, 2002, and Jason Stearns, Dancing in the Glory of Monsters.
19. Nicholas Tsurukawa, et al., Social impacts of artisanal cobalt mining in Katanga, p16.
20. “Historique du SAESSCAM,” available at http://www.saesscam.cd/SAESSCAM/pages/historique.php (accessed June 10, 2015).
21. DRC Mining Code (2002): Loi N° 007/2002 Du 11 Juillet 2002 Portant Code Minier, available in English at http://mines-rdc.cd/fr/documents/codemi-
nier_eng.pdf (accessed 10 June 2015) (DRC Mining Code (2002)).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 17
attracting foreign companies.22 Major western and and they must respect government regulations, the
Chinese mining companies subsequently resumed Code of Conduct for Artisanal Miners (Code de
industrial mining at the most productive of conduit pour l’exploitant artisanal), regarding “safety,
Gécamines’ old sites. They drove out the artisanal health, use of water and the protection of the
miners, sometimes provoking violent protests.23 environment.”29 If miners do not respect these rules,
The government’s policies also created many the government can withdraw their mining cards.30
new artisanal miners. For example, in 2003, the However, these regulations, published separately
government restructured Gécamines with the support in 2003, are mostly concerned with mitigating
of the World Bank. Almost half of the workforce, environmental damage.31 They provide little in the
some 10,655 employees, lost their jobs, with many way of guidance on health and safety. For example,
unemployed workers subsequently joining artisanal the regulations ban the use of explosives and mercury,
mining operations.24 but do not mention how other potentially harmful
minerals, such as cobalt, should be handled.32 The
regulations also oblige miners to construct tunnels
GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF no deeper than 30m, at an incline of at least 15
degrees, with horizontal banks every two metres, but
ARTISANAL MINING
provide no other information on how mines should be
constructed and managed safely.33
The 2002 Mining Code authorized artisanal mining
within tightly defined limits. Article 21 of the Code The Mining Code established that artisanal mining
recognized artisanal mining as “any activity by can only take place within authorized Zones
means of which a person of Congolese nationality d’exploitation artisanale (Artisanal Mining Zones or
carries out extraction and concentration of mineral ZEAs) where industrial or semi-industrial mining
substances using artisanal tools, methods and is not viable.34 However, the government has been
processes, within an artisanal exploitation area criticised for not creating enough ZEAs.35 As a result,
limited in terms of surface area and depth up to a most artisanal miners are pushed to work in unauthorized
maximum of thirty metres.”25 and unregulated areas, or to illegally trespass on
land controlled by industrial mining companies to
The DRC’s Mining Code stipulates that all miners access cobalt and other minerals.
must be adults.26 They must hold valid “artisanal
mining cards,” issued by the provincial government.27 Mining outside authorized areas is illegal, and
They must sell their produce to licensed traders28 miners face the threat of being fined. However, it
22. USGS, The Mineral Industry of Congo (Kinshasa), 2012, p. 11.1 available at http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/country/2012/myb3-2012-cg.pdf
(accessed 9 October 2015).
23. E.g., Joe Bavier, Police clash with miners in Congo copper heartland, Reuters, 31 March 2008, available at http://www.reuters.com/article/2008/03/31/
congo-democratic-demonstration-idUSL3191292220080331 (accessed June 9, 2015) (Joe Bavier, Police clash with miners in Congo copper heart-
land).
24. Nicholas Tsurukawa, et al., Social impacts of artisanal cobalt mining in Katanga, p16.
25. DRC Mining Code (2002).
26. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 23.
27. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 111.
28. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 116.
29. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 112.
30. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 115.
31. DRC Mining Regulations (2003), Code De Conduite De L’exploitant Artisanal, available at http://mines-rdc.cd/fr/documents/Annexe_V.pdf (accessed 9
October 2015).
32. DRC Mining Regulations (2003), Article 2.
33. DRC Mining Regulations (2003), Article 9.
34. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 109.
35. Ministère des Mines – Unité d’Exécution du Projet PROMINES, Audit du Cadre Institutionnel et Organisationnel régissant le Secteur des Mines, 2013,
available at http://www.prominesrdc.cd/fr/Rapport/Rapport_Orga_saess.pdf (accessed 9 October 2015) (Ministère des Mines – Unité d’Exécution du
Projet PROMINES, Audit du Cadre Institutionnel et Organisationnel régissant le Secteur des Mines).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

18 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
has been argued that these fines are so large, and GLOBAL TRADE
so beyond the means of miners to pay, that they
are essentially meaningless, and do not serve as a
Cobalt that is dug from the DRC’s artisanal mines soon
deterrent.36 For example, any person engaging in
enters a global trading network. It is an important
illegal mining activities is liable for a fine of between
mineral that has many different commercial, industrial
US$10,000 and US$250,000. Similarly, any person
and military applications.41 For example, cobalt is
purchasing or selling minerals in contravention of
contained in super alloys used in jet engines, and in
the law will be liable for a fine of US$10,000 and
the lithium-ion batteries that power most electronic
US$30,000.37 Miners in unauthorized areas still live
devices such as laptops and cell phones.
under the constant fear of being moved on by the
government, and there have been violent confrontations
Artisanal miners sell their products at authorized
as they have tried to resist this.38
buying houses close to the mines, many of which are
run by foreign nationals. These buying houses then
As noted above, the government agency charged with sell the ore to international trading companies, which
regulating artisanal mining, and ensuring that these refine it within the DRC before export. Typically, the
rules are met, is called SAESSCAM. Its failure to do mineral is then loaded onto trucks and driven to
so adequately has been widely reported on.39 The the South African port of Durban. From there, ships
main criticisms of SAESSCAM centres on its lack of carry most of it to China for further processing and
capacity to monitor the thousands of artisanal mines sale to component manufacturers.42 For this report,
that exist across the DRC. This issue is examined in researchers have traced many of the companies
detail in Chapter 2.40 involved in this supply chain (See Chapter 4).
36. Pact Inc., PROMINES Study, p. 25.
37. DRC Mining Code (2002), Articles 299 and 302.
38. Joe Bavier, Police clash with miners in Congo copper heartland.
39. Daniel Rothenberg and Ben Radley, We miners take our lives in our hands; Pact Inc., PROMINES Study; and Nicholas Tsurukawa, et al., Social impacts
of artisanal cobalt mining in Katanga.
40. Some of these unauthorized mines are in privately-owned mining concessions, whose owners allow artisanal miners to operate in exchange for a per-
centage of their earnings. Other unauthorized artisanal mines are dug in areas, outside of mining concessions, where locals find minerals. Elsewhere,
miners break into industrial mine complexes to scavenge among the tailings or dig mines for cobalt and other minerals. Amnesty International inter-
views with two mining officials, Katanga, August 2015.
41. USGS, 2012 Minerals yearbook.
42. USGS, Mineral Commodity Summary: Cobalt 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 19
to, including the risk of fatal accidents. This section
includes a description of mining activities in Kasulo,
2. HUMAN RIGHTS
an area of Kolwezi city. Section II looks at the issue
of child labour in artisanal mines. Section III outlines
ABUSES IN ARTISANAL
the DRC’s obligations to protect workers and children
COBALT MINING under international human rights law, and examines
its failure to do so.
This chapter outlines the human rights abuses I. HAZARDOUS WORKING
taking place in artisanal cobalt mining operations in
CONDITIONS IN ARTISANAL
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The
chapter is broken down into three sections. Section I
COBALT MINES
looks at the health hazards that miners are exposed
CASE STUDY 1: KASULO
Kasulo is a residential neighbourhood of Kolwezi, a town which is built around a number of major industrial copper
and cobalt mines. In the summer of 2014, residents discovered that a rich seam of heterogenite ore runs under
their homes. In July 2014, the mayor of Kolwezi outlawed mining in Kasulo as it is not an officially designated
artisanal mining zone (ZEA).43 Yet since the discovery, the residents, along with thousands of miners who flocked to
the neighbourhood, have dug hundreds of mines. Satellite images that were taken before and after the cobalt was
discovered reveal the scale of the affected area.
Satellite images of Kasulo before July 2014 when residents and miners began digging for cobalt. © DigitalGlobe 2015.
43. Radio Okapi, Le maire interdit l’exploitation artisanale de minerais à Kasulo, 18 July 2014 http://radiookapi.net/societe/2014/07/18/kol-
wezi-le-maire-interdit-lexploitation-artisanale-de-minerais-kasulo/ (accessed 9 October 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

20 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Satellite images of Kasulo taken after July 2014 showing the extent of the digging in the neighbourhood, where hundreds of mines have been dug.
© DigitalGlobe 2015.
Researchers from Amnesty International and Afrewatch visited Kasulo in April and May 2015. It is a densely
populated area, with mining happening alongside, and often inside, people’s homes. In one house, researchers saw
a mine shaft leading down through the floor of a room. The owner said that he did not want to start a mine, but said
he felt he had no choice when his neighbours started tunnelling under his plot of land.44
One of the miners took a camera, provided by the
researchers, and filmed inside the mine.45 His footage
shows a narrow shaft that descends deep underground,
which the miners said was more than 30 metres deep.
The miners climb down with bare feet, holding on to
small ledges that have been cut out of the side. At
the bottom of the pit, the miners have dug a tunnel
that follows the heterogenite seam as it curves, rises
and falls. At several points the tunnel meets those of
neighbouring teams – the miners told researchers that
they worry that at night when their mine is unguarded,
their neighbours sometimes break into their tunnel to
steal their ore. In some places, the tunnel is wide and
tall so that the men can stand upright; in others it is
extremely narrow, and they have to crawl. The tunnel Miners climb out of a mine shaft by placing their hands and feet in
holes carved out of the sides of the pit shaft. They use a rope attached
is not held up by supports, but the miners say they
to a beam stretched over the mouth of the pit as support. Sometimes
know how to dig through the rock so that it does not the rope cuts and miners fall, a miner told researchers, May 2015
© Amnesty International and Afrewatch
collapse.
44. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
45. On file with Amnesty International.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 21
The head torches of the miners light up the pits where they dig for cobalt tens of metres below Kasulo, where residents and miners have dug
hundreds of pits to extract this valuable mineral, May 2015. (Still taken from footage shot by a miner using a GoPro camera for Amnesty
International). © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
The only tools the men have are mallets, chisels and head torches. The miners do not have gloves, boots, helmets,
or face masks to prevent them from breathing in cobalt dust. At the end of each shift the men pull up sacks of rock
using a rope. Didier, a 22 year old student who started mining to pay for his college fees, said that he and the other
miners are afraid of accidents and drink alcohol to forget the risks.46
Researchers found no evidence in Kasulo that
children go into the tunnels, yet they are openly
working on the surface. Researchers photographed
two groups of boys who appeared under the age of
16 sorting piles of minerals. They were not wearing
gloves or face masks, even though, as discussed later,
cobalt ore can be a hazardous substance. Mobile
phone footage of Kasulo, taken by a human rights
activist, also shows several groups of boys under the
age of 16 doing this work.47 Micheline, a 32-year-old
woman who provides food for miners in Kasulo, said
that there are children as young as six there. “They
collect and gather the minerals. Parents send their
children there, because they don’t have money and
because they don’t have jobs,” she said.48
The mining area is close to the centre of Kolwezi and
connected by a main road. There is a police station
at the entrance to the neighbourhood. Miners said
that the police tax vehicles carrying ore as they
pass by. Inside the neighbourhood, the researchers
themselves were stopped by men, who told them
they were not permitted to enter a mining area. The
men, who said that they were members of the mines
Children sorting and crushing cobalt ore in the neighbourhood of
police, demanded payment in the form of a fine. Kasulo, Kolwezi, DRC. Since the discovery hundreds of mines have
While one man was in a regular police uniform, the been dug by artisanal miners in the neighbourhood. May 2015
© Amnesty International and Afrewatch
others were not.
46. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
47. There is a series of films of mining activities, purportedly filmed in Kasulo in August 2014, for example, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WrYC71j70X8
48. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

22 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
COBALT: HEALTH RISKS The DRC Mining Code (2002) and Regulations
(2003) provide no guidance on safety equipment or
how to handle substances which may pose a danger
“When we come out of the mine we are tired.
to human health, apart from mercury. By contrast,
The dust is bad. Some people have problems with
many regional and national bodies provide safety
their lungs,”
guidance for people handling cobalt on a regular
Pierre, 27, artisanal miner, Kasulo, Kolwezi.49 basis. These advise that people should wear protective
equipment to ensure they do not come into contact
The men, women and children involved in artisanal with the mineral, or inhale its dust.53 The CDC, for
cobalt mining are exposed to a number of different example, advises people working with cobalt to wear
health risks. To begin with, exposure to high levels of respirators, impervious clothing, gloves and “face
cobalt can, according to the World Health Organization, shields.”54
have both short and long-term negative health effects.50
Chronic exposure to dust containing cobalt can result Researchers from Amnesty International and Afrewatch
in a potentially fatal lung disease called “hard metal visited five cobalt mining areas, and interviewed
lung disease,” according to the US Centre for Disease nearly 90 men, women and children involved in mining
Control (CDC).51 Inhalation of cobalt particles can cobalt. The vast majority did not have the most basic
also cause “respiratory sensitization, asthma, shortness
protective equipment, such as gloves, or even work
of breath, and decreased pulmonary function.”
clothes such as overalls. Despite the fact that they
Sustained skin contact with cobalt may lead to
face the potentially fatal risk of inhaling cobalt dust
contact dermatitis.52
while they work, none of those whom Amnesty
International and Afrewatch researchers saw or spoke
to even had basic facemasks.
Safety guidance, issued by regional and national
regulatory bodies in other counties, also advises that
workspaces where the mineral is handled should be
well ventilated.55 Miners told Amnesty International
and Afrewatch that their underground mines were
not well ventilated, and that the build-up of dust in
the tunnels frequently affected them. It is routine
for miners to spend 12 hours a day working
underground.56
Many of the miners complained that they coughed
Children sorting cobalt ore in the neighbourhood of Kasulo, Kolwezi, a lot or had problems with their lungs, such as
DRC, May 2015. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
Corneille, who has worked in “Laverie” mine at
49. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
50. World Health Organization, Concise International Chemical Assessment Document 69: Cobalt and Inorganic Cobalt Compounds, 2006, available at
http://www.who.int/ipcs/publications/cicad/cicad69%20.pdf (accessed 9 October 2015).
51. Center for Disease Control (CDC), Workplace Safety & Health Topics: Cobalt, available at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/cobalt/ (accessed 9 October
2015) (CDC, Workplace Safety & Health Topics: Cobalt).
52. CDC, Workplace Safety & Health Topics: Cobalt.
53. European Chemicals Agency, Cobalt: Guidance on Safe Use, http://apps.echa.europa.eu/registered/data/dossiers/DISS-9c8246bc-6f29-126a-e044-
00144f67d249/AGGR-8183f687-8b78-4582-8473-66e251a45822_DISS-9c8246bc-6f29-126a-e044-00144f67d249.html#AGGR-8183f687-
8b78-4582-8473-66e251a45822, (accessed 18 November 2015) (European Chemicals Agency, Cobalt: Guidance on Safe Use); UK Health and
Safety Executive, Cobalt and you: Working with cobalt – are you at risk?, 2013, http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg442.pdf (accessed 18 July 2015) (UK
Health and Safety Executive, Cobalt and you).
54. CDC, Workplace Safety & Health Topics: Cobalt.
55. CDC, Workplace Safety & Health Topics: Cobalt; European Chemicals Agency, Cobalt: Guidance on Safe Use; and UK Health and Safety Executive,
Cobalt and you.
56. Amnesty International interviews with artisanal miners, Kasulo, Kolwezi, 10 May, Kambove, 15 May 2015, Likasi, 16 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 23
Kambove for four years, and Albert, who has worked RISK OF FATAL ACCIDENTS
in several mines near Likasi since 1997.57
UNDERGROUND
Researchers also spoke to women who complained of
respiratory problems and pain as a result of carrying “There are many accidents. Many tunnels
heavy loads and the physically demanding nature of collapse. The bodies are still there,”
the work. Josephine, a 33 year old mother of five,
Emmanuel, 32, artisanal miner for ten years, Kasulo,
said she would have to carry 50 kg sacks for more Kolwezi.61
than an hour at a time. “We all have problems with
our lungs, and pain all over our bodies.”58 Researchers The mines can also be dangerous places to work if
spoke to other women who complained of suffering not constructed and managed safely. The DRC’s
frequent urinary tract infections, which they attributed UN-run radio station, Radio Okapi, one of the country’s
to working in dirty water all day.59 few reliable sources of independent information,
reported the following incidents at unauthorized
The government does not conduct health monitoring, artisanal mines in cobalt mining areas in 2014 and
so the people working in the mining areas said that 2015:
they were not sure if the health issues they complained
of were linked to exposure to cobalt. Studies have • At least 13 miners died when their tunnel
shown that poor sanitation and health care provision collapsed in Mabaya, an artisanal cobalt mining
are common in artisanal mining areas. According area on 8 September 2015. The previous week,
to the International Institute for Environment and 17 miners died in four separate accidents in the
Development: same locality, according to a local NGO.62
“This is generally due to the supposedly • Five miners died and 13 others were injured
‘temporary’ status of these communities. following an underground fire at a cobalt mine
In many cases, the discovery of a deposit in Kasulo, Kolwezi, on 5 September 2015. The
results in a sudden arrival of miners from miners had lit a tyre underground to try to break
other regions in search of new opportunities. the rock.63
Unorganized camps grow virtually overnight.
These remotely located camps, because of • Seven miners died in three separate tunnel
their temporary status, do not usually qualify collapses at cobalt mines in Kasumbalesa, in
for public health-care facilities — especially August 2015.64
from the viewpoint of public health officers
with chronically low government health-care • 15 miners died following a fire in a cobalt mine
budgets.”60 in Kasulo on 26 December 2014.65
57. Amnesty International interviews, Kambove 15 May 2015, and Likasi, 16 May 2015.
58. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 11 May 2015.
59. According to a DRC government medical expert, these infections could be caused by bacteria in the water, due to people defecating nearby. Email from
Dr Marie-Louise Mbo, 18 December 2015.
60. Thomas Hentschel, Felix Hruschka and Michael Priester, Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining: Challenges and Opportunities, International Institute for
Environment and Development and World Business Council for Sustainable Development, 2003, p28, available at http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/9268IIED.
pdf (accessed 9 October 2015).
61. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
62. Radio Okapi, 13 creuseurs meurent à la recherche du cobalt au Haut-Katanga, 8 September 2015, www.radiookapi.net/2015/09/08/actualite/societe/
rdc-13-morts-lors-dun-eboulement-de-terre-dans-un-nouvelle-mine-de (accessed 23 December 2015) (Radio Okapi, 13 creuseurs meurent à la recher-
che du cobalt au Haut-Katanga).
63. Radio Okapi, 5 morts dans un incendie à Kasulo, 5 September 2015, www.radiookapi.net/2015/09/05/actualite/societe/lualaba-5-morts-dans-un-in-
cendie-kasulo (accessed 23 December 2015) (Radio Okapi, 5 morts dans un incendie à Kasulo).
64. Radio Okapi, 7 personnes meurent dans des éboulements de terre à Kasumbalesa, 4 September 2015, http://www.radiookapi.net/2015/09/04/actu-
alite/societe/haut-katanga-7-personnes-meurent-dans-des-eboulements-de-terre (accessed 23 December 2015).
65. Radio Okapi, 15 creuseurs artisanaux morts brûlés dans une galerie souterraine à Kolwezi, 27 December 2015, www.radiookapi.net/actu-
alite/2014/12/27/katanga-15-creuseurs-artisanaux-morts-brules-dans-une-galerie-souterraine-kolwezi/ (accessed 23 December 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

24 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
• 16 men died in three separate incidents while Miners explained some of the reasons why accidents
mining at sites in the Kawama area of Kolwezi, are common. For example, some engage in dangerous
either in pit collapses or through suffocation, in practices, such as lighting fires under rocks to break
September 2014.66 them. This can kill miners by burning up the oxygen
underground.71 Hand-dug mines can extend for tens
• At least nine died in a pit collapse caused by of metres underground, often without any support to
rain at Mashamba, outside Kolwezi, in December hold them up.72 These tunnels do not follow straight
2014.67 lines, but follow mineral seams instead.73 Miners
estimated that the tunnels could reach up to 60 metres,
although they did not have accurate measures.
There is no official data available on the number of
François, a 37 year old miner, judged the depth of
fatalities that occur, but miners in unregulated mines
the tunnel in Kambove by the time it took him to
said that they risk injury or death whenever they go
reach the bottom: 15 minutes.74 Miners said that
underground, and accidents are common. Jean-Pierre,
they trusted their instincts and expertise to ensure
the owner of a mine in Kasulo, Kolwezi said that
that these tunnels did not collapse, but accidents
there were 5-6 accidents a month in the area, and
occur if they make mistakes or if rain water enters.75
each time he was asked to contribute money to help
In Kasulo, Kolwezi, miners complained that there
the injured miners.68 Pierre, a miner there who broke
was no co-ordination between rival groups so that
his leg in 2011 when a tunnel caved in, said that
their tunnels sometimes met, undermining their walls.76
“mine collapses are frequent.” He was hauled out of
the mine by his co-workers and it took him 6 months
According to Michael, a 22 year old miner in Kambove
to recover.69
who has worked since he was 15, one of the reasons
for the accidents is that some miners ignore warnings
Many accidents are not recorded as miners may not
not to dig in mines where accidents have already
want to come into contact with the authorities because
taken place:
they are working without licenses in unauthorized
mining areas, explained Sister Nathalie Kangaj, who
“The accidents are common. They put a red
runs a legal advice centre in Kolwezi. Additionally,
cross on the pits where there has been an
the miners may have travelled a long way from their accident to show that it is dangerous. But
families to work in the mines. Sister Nathalie said some people still mine in those ones already
that in some cases the bodies of miners who have declared dangerous. Last Saturday there was
died underground have never been recovered. She a mine collapse and somebody died. They
recalled a recent case where she was visited by the only recovered his body on Tuesday. Three
father of a miner who had been buried alive in a others were injured. Then on Tuesday there
mine, but whose body was not found. “They die and was another collapse and another miner
are forgotten,” she said.70 died.”77
66. Radio Okapi, 16 creuseurs artisanaux sont morts dans des mines à Kawama, 26 September 2014, http://radiookapi.net/actualite/2014/09/26/katanga-
16-creuseurs-artisanaux-sont-morts-dans-des-mines-kawama/ (accessed 23 December 2015) (Radio Okapi, 16 creuseurs artisanaux sont morts dans
des mines à Kawama).
67. Radio Okapi, 9 morts dans un éboulement de terre à Kolwezi, 11 December 2014, http://radiookapi.net/actualite/2014/11/12/katanga-9-morts-dans-
eboulement-de-terre-kolwezi/ (accessed 23 December 2015).
68. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
69. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 11 May 2015.
70. Amnesty International interview with Sister Nathalie Kangaj, Kolwezi, 9 May 2015.
71. Radio Okapi, 5 morts dans un incendie à Kasulo.
72. Amnesty International interviews Kasulo, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015, Kambove, 15 May 2015, Likasi, 16 May 2015.
73. Amnesty International interviews Kambove, 15 May 2015, Likasi, 16 May 2015.
74. Amnesty International interview Kambove, 15 May 2015.
75. Radio Okapi, 13 creuseurs meurent à la recherche du cobalt au Haut-Katanga.
76. Amnesty International interview, Kasulo, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
77. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 15 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 25
Diagrams drawn by artisanal miners to show the layout and depth of their mine. The miners dig the tunnels using hand tools, following the seam of cobalt
ore as it winds and descends down through the earth. The tunnels often go beyond the maximum depth of 30 metres stipulated by the DRC’s Mining
Code. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
Some mine shafts are so deep that oxygen needs
to be pumped into them, with the danger that the
generators can fail and those working in the mines
will suffocate.78 Richard, the 37-year-old miner in
Kambove, explained that when the generators run
out of fuel, they cannot breathe and need to climb
out as fast as possible.79
Researchers watched miners descend a mine shaft
in Kasulo barefoot, placing their hands and feet in
holes carved out of the sides of the pit shaft. They
used a rope attached to a beam stretched over the
mouth of the pit as support. One of them said that
sometimes, “the rope cuts, and people fall.”80
Miners use a rope attached to a beam stretched over the mouth of
the pit as support to climb down into the pit or climb out. © Amnesty
International and Afrewatch
78. Radio Okapi, Katanga: 16 creuseurs artisanaux sont morts dans des mines à Kawama.
79. Amnesty International interview, Kambove, 15 May 2015.
80. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

26 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
An air pump supplies oxygen to artisanal miners working in the pits in a mine on the outskirts of Kolwezi, DRC. A miner told researchers that when the
generators run out of fuel, they cannot breathe and need to climb out as fast as possible, May 2015. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
CASE STUDY 2: KAPATA
Kapata is a township originally built for mine
workers, on the outskirts of Kolwezi. It is
surrounded by industrial mining concessions.
It has a lake, called Lake Malo, made by a dam
created by the tailings of an industrial mine.
Amnesty International and Afrewatch
researchers visited Kapata in May 2015, and
saw about one hundred people, including
many children, working at the edge of and in
the lake. The people were washing and sorting
ore containing cobalt and copper that they had
scavenged for in the tailings of the industrial
mining concessions. Some of the women had
babies and infants with them.
Researchers spoke to François, who was sorting
stones with his 13-year-old son, Charles.81 He
said that Charles sorts and washes the minerals,
before helping to transport them to a nearby
Women wash mineral ore in Lake Malo, Kapata on the outskirts of Kolwezi,
trading house, which buys the ore. François
DRC. One woman told researchers that it was very difficult working long days
said that Charles goes to school each morning, from 6am until 6pm in the sun with no cover and no shade, May 2015. ©
and works in the afternoon: Amnesty International and Afrewatch
81. Amnesty International interview, Kapata, 12 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 27
“It is difficult to afford the school fees. It is difficult to afford food. We work because we have to, because
there are no jobs. Give us jobs and we’ll look after our children properly.”82
Maude, aged 37, who had been washing mineral ore for seven years, told researchers:
“I work washing stones to pay the rent and to support my husband and five children. I have three children in
school, but can’t afford to send two of them.”83
Maude said that she washed eight to twelve sacks of 50 kg per day, for which she earned 1,500 Congolese Francs
(around US$1.50). She said it was very difficult working long days from 6am until 6pm in the sun with no cover and
no shade.84 Four women said that every day they have to pay 500 Congolese Francs ($US 0.50) as tax to an official
of the government agency SAESSCAM, who the researchers met.85
After washing and sorting ore, the people working there transported it to one of the buying houses close by. One
Chinese-owned trading house, called “Good Show,” is located about 50m away from the lake. Workers there said
that they then sell the ore to bigger companies which refine and export the ore.86
Many women, some with babies and young infants, wash and sort mineral ore on the shore and in the shallow waters of Lake Malo, Kapata on
the outskirts of Kolwezi, DRC, May 2015 © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
82. Amnesty International interview, Kapata, 12 May 2015.
83. Amnesty International interview, Kapata, 12 May 2015.
84. Amnesty International interview, Kapata, 12 May 2015.
85. Amnesty International interview, Kapata, 12 May 2015.
86. Amnesty International interview, Kapata, 12 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

28 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
II. CHILDREN IN ARTISANAL to the concessions where they washed and sorted the
stones. One of the boys said that he had also worked
COBALT MINING
as a miner underground.88
“I worked in the mines because my parents Researchers also observed children working at four
couldn’t afford to pay for food and clothes unregulated mining areas in April and May 2015
for me. Papa is unemployed, and mama sells – two in Kolwezi (Kasulo and Malo Lake) and two
charcoal.” in Kambove (an inactive Gécamines site and the
Laverie). It is no secret that children mine cobalt
Arthur 13, who worked in a mine from age 9 to 11
in the DRC. The US Department of Labor has listed
years old.87
it as a good produced by child labour since at least
Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers 2009.89 Several non-governmental organisations
interviewed 17 boys and girls in Kolwezi and Kambove (NGOs) have also published studies on child labour
who had mined, collected or handled cobalt. The in Katangan mines. UNICEF estimated in 2014 that
youngest was seven years old when he worked at approximately 40,000 boys and girls work in all the
the mine. All but one of the children worked above mines across the whole of the former province, many
ground, either collecting minerals from the mountains of them involved in cobalt mining.90 In 2013, World
of tailings in active and inactive industrial mining Vision published a detailed study of children working
concessions, or working in streams and lakes close in the artisanal mines of Kambove.91
THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOUR
DRC is a party to the International Labour Organization (ILO) Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182),
which requires governments to take immediate and effective measures to secure the prohibition and elimination of
the worst forms of child labour.92 Children are defined as all persons under the age of 1893 and ‘the worst forms of
child labour’ comprises amongst others, “work which, by its nature or the circumstances in which it is carried out, is
likely to harm the health, safety or morals of children.”94
ILO Recommendation 190 gives guidance to states parties on determining the types of work that may harm the
health, safety or morals of children. It recommends that consideration should be given to:
(a) work which exposes children to physical, psychological or sexual abuse;
(b) work underground, under water, at dangerous heights or in confined spaces;
(c) work with dangerous machinery, equipment and tools, or which involves the manual handling or transport of
heavy loads;
87. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
88. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
89. US Department of Labor, List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor, available at www.dol.gov/ilab/reports/child-labor/list-of-goods/
(accessed 9 October 2015) (US Department of Labor, List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor).
90. UNICEF, Factsheet: enfants dans les mines, December 2014.
91. World Vision, Child Miners Speak: key findings on children and artisanal mining in Kambove, DRC, March 2013, available at: http://www.worldvision.
org/resources.nsf/main/press-reports/$file/201303_Child-Miners-Speak_REPORT.pdf (accessed 9 October 2015).
92. International Labour Organization (ILO), Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182), Art. 1, available at http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/
en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C182 (ILO, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182)).
93. ILO, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182), Article 2.
94. ILO, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182), Article 3 (d).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 29
(d) work in an unhealthy environment which may, for example, expose children to hazardous substances, agents or
processes, or to temperatures, noise levels, or vibrations damaging to their health;
(e) work under particularly difficult conditions, such as work for long hours or during the night or work where the
child is unreasonably confined to the premises of the employer.
According to the ILO, “[m]ining and quarrying are forms of work dangerous to children in every way”.95 “Mining
and quarrying are physically dangerous because of the heavy and awkward loads, the strenuous work, the unstable
underground structures, the heavy tools and equipment, the toxic dusts and chemicals and the exposure to extremes
of heat and cold”.96 The ILO noted that “[e]vidence from various surveys and research studies demonstrates that
mining is by far the most hazardous sector for children with respect to fatal injuries”.97 It described various health
and other baseline studies on health problems associated with mining and exposure to chemicals and stated that
“[a] cross-sectional study within one artisanal mine measured the levels of 17 different metals and non-metals in
47 children below the age of 14 years working in or living at the mine. This study revealed substantial exposure to
various metals in the child workers. Overall, an analysis of urine samples demonstrated far higher levels of toxic
metals in children miners in comparison with adults despite their lower exposure”.98 The ILO also noted that
“[c]obalt, which has the potential to damage the heart, thyroid and lungs, and can exacerbate occupational asthma,
was found in 87 per cent of children living close to a mining site. Blood levels not only exceeded the occupational
limit values, but were the highest ever reported for a general population.”99
The children interviewed by researchers described
HAZARDOUS WORK
the physically demanding nature of the work they
All of the tasks carried out by children in the mines did. They said that they worked for up to 12 hours a
require them to carry heavy sacks of mineral ore, day in the mines, carrying heavy loads, to earn between
sometimes carrying loads that weigh more than they
one and two dollars a day. Even those children who
do. Children reported carrying bags weighing anywhere
went to school worked 10 – 12 hours during the
between 20 – 40 kg.100 Carrying and lifting heavy
weekend and school holidays, and in the time before
loads can be immediately injurious or can result in
long-term damage such as joint and bone deformi- and after school. The children who were not attend-
ties, back injury, muscle injury and musculoskeletal ing school worked in the mines all year around. Paul,
injuries.101 Former child workers in the mines told
aged 14, started mining at the age of 12 and worked
Amnesty International researchers that they had
in tunnels underground. He told researchers he
suffered muscle pain and pain in the back, hips or in
would often “spend 24 hours down in the tunnels. I
the whole body.102 Loïc, who worked from the ages of
9-11, said that his back used to hurt from bending over arrived in the morning and would leave the following
to collect stones and from carrying heavy sacks.103 morning.”104
95. ILO, Children in Hazardous work: What we know, what we need to do, 2011, p.32, available at: http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@dgreports/@
dcomm/@publ/documents/publication/wcms_155428.pdf (accessed 18 July 2015) (ILO, Children in Hazardous work: What we know, what we need to
do).
96. ILO, Children in Hazardous work: What we know, what we need to do, p. 33.
97. ILO, Children in Hazardous work: What we know, what we need to do, p. 34.
98. ILO, Children in Hazardous work: What we know, what we need to do, p. 34 – 35.
99. ILO, Children in Hazardous work: What we know, what we need to do, p. 34.
100. When they sell the ore to traders, they pay them based on an estimate of weight, which is how the children said they knew the approximate weight of
the bags they carried. Amnesty International interviews, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
101. ILO, Children in Hazardous work: What we know, what we need to do, p. 34.
102. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
103. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
104. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

30 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
The children said that they worked in the open, in they needed to enter mining concessions that were
high temperatures, or in the rain. As with adult miners, patrolled by security guards. Children in Kolwezi said
none of the children interviewed for this report or that security guards sometimes caught children and
observed in the mine sites had any sort of protective physically abused them. The children said that some
equipment, such as gloves or face masks when of these guards were employed by the state mining
handling cobalt. The children are therefore exposed company, Gécamines.
to high levels of cobalt on a consistent basis, leaving
them vulnerable to short-term and long-term negative One girl, Mathy, described how in 2012, when she was
health impacts. 12, she and a friend were caught on the concession
by security guards:
The children interviewed for this report complained
of being frequently ill. “There is lots of dust, it is “They asked for money, but we didn’t have
very easy to catch colds, and we hurt all over,” Dany, any…They grabbed my friend and pushed
a 15-year-old said.105 According to Olivier, who her into a tank containing diesel oil. I was
worked from ages 10-13, “I had a cough and muscle able to run away and hide, but I saw what
pain and a runny nose. When it rained it was very happened. I cried. I was scared, I ran away
difficult and I became sick.”106 and hid, so I saw what happened.”109
When working in the mines, the children often went Loïc said that guards often chased him and his
the whole day without eating. Mathy, who was forced friends. “Several times they caught us and they hit
to work at the age of nine after her father had an us,” he said. According to Roger, aged 13, private
accident and lost his job, said she often did not eat security guards, “used to whip us, and sometimes
all day. “I could only eat when I had enough money,” they used to dunk us in dirty water.”110
she said.107
Juste, who was 11 at the time he mined, said that
adult artisanal miners would also scare off the
PHYSICAL ABUSE FACED BY CHILDREN children, and sometimes stole their sacks of minerals.
Olivier, 14, said that he worked in a team of five
As well as the routine hardships of daily work, artisanal boys. If they were caught by the security guards they
mining can be dangerous and damaging for children would have to pay them 1,500 Congolese Francs
in other ways. A child protection officer working at (US$1.5), otherwise the guards would take their sacks.
UNICEF told researchers that living or working in
these areas exposes them to physical abuse, drug
The children said that they did not report these
abuse, sexual exploitation and violence.108 Amnesty
incidents to the police because they knew that they
International and Afrewatch researchers interviewed
were trespassing illegally on land controlled by the
several children who said they had been beaten, or
mining companies and they did not want to get into
seen other children beaten, by security guards at
trouble. They also feared that their complaints would
mines in Kolwezi.
not be taken seriously.
To reach the tailings where they can collect valuable
stones containing cobalt, the children said that
105. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
106. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
107. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
108. Amnesty International interview with UNICEF child protection officer, Lubumbashi, 10 May 2015.
109. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
110. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 31
“Sometimes if we didn’t get a product we
FINANCIAL EXPLOITATION OF CHILD WORKERS
would go to a négociant and borrow money
and then had to work for him for the next
The children in the mines mostly work independently,
day. The next day the négociant would say no
collecting and gathering minerals, which they then
it’s not 10kg its 8kg. It’s all an estimate.”114
sell to négociants (traders), who then sell the minerals
to buying houses.
LACK OF FREE PRIMARY
Most children indicated that they earned between
1000-2000 Congolese Francs per day (US$1-2).
EDUCATION AND OTHER CAUSES
Children who collected, sorted, washed, crushed
OF CHILD LABOUR
and transported minerals were paid per sack of
minerals by the traders. The children had no way of
independently verifying the weight of the sacks or
“School fees are too expensive. Parents with no
the grade of the ore and so had to accept what the
work can’t send two, three, four children to school”
traders paid them, making them susceptible to
exploitation. Loïc, 13, told researchers that he Pascal Bukengere Kanegeshe, school manager, Kolwezi.115
earned about 2000 Congolese Francs a day (US$2)
The children interviewed for this report said that
but that he did not feel he was paid fairly for his work:
they had to work, since their parents had no formal
employment, and struggled to feed, clothe and
“I sold to négociants who have scales. But
educate their families. Family poverty is the main
some of the others did not have scales and reason for working in the mines, according to child
just estimated the weight and were not fair. and adult miners, as well as NGO staff which work to
They exploited the children, they paid us remove children from the mines. According to
less than they paid the adults.”111 the World Bank, almost two thirds of the DRC’s
population lives below the poverty line.116 Researchers
spoke to a number of former child miners, who
The children did not take home all the money they
stated that they worked in the mines in order to
earned, however. They told researchers how they
contribute to the subsistence of their families. Fred,
often had to pay off state or private security agents
13, told researchers that neither of his parents had
and use the money for expenses. Kikaya, aged 9,
work, so he had to work in the mine collecting minerals
explained that sometimes they would have to pay to contribute to the family. During term-time, he
off the adult artisanal miners 500 Congolese Francs attended school and worked Saturdays in the mines,
(US$0.50), and that the adults would sometimes but during the holidays, he worked from morning to
also steal from them.112 Roger, 13, earned 1500 evening in the mines.117
Congolese Francs per day (US$1.50), but of that
Pierre, an adult miner working in Kasulo, Kolwezi,
amount he had to pay guards 500 Congolese Francs
told researchers that:
(US$0.50) and would spend about 200 Congolese
Francs (US$0.20) on food. He told researchers that
“parents send their children there, because
he hardly had much money left at the end of the day.113
they don’t have the means to live and because
Sometimes children would be forced to sell to particular they don’t have jobs. If the children have
traders if they had borrowed money from them. Mathy, 14, nothing to eat, they go to work in the mines
worked in a pair collecting minerals from 6 am to 5 pm: or they sell snacks/drinks.”118
111. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
112. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
113. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
114. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
115. Amnesty International interview with Manager, Projet Pour La Protection de L’enfant, Bon Pasteur, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
116. World Bank DRC country page, available at http://data.worldbank.org/country/congo-dem-rep (accessed 16 July 2015).
117. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
118. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 10 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

32 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Dany, 15, told researchers that, “all the money I Researchers met François by Lake Malo in Kapata,
earn in the mines I spend on food, because at home just outside Kolwezi. He told researchers that he had
we don’t eat.”119 three out of five children studying in school, but that
they were expelled from school when they couldn’t
pay the fees. One son, Charles, now works with him
Children interviewed for this report said that one of
at the mine and goes to school in the morning when
the main reasons that they had to work was because
he has the money.124
their parents could not afford school fees. The DRC
Child Protection Code (2009), provides for free and
Some of the children said that they did not go to
compulsory primary education for all children.120
school at all. Others said that they worked before or
However, as a result of a lack of adequate funding after school hours, during the weekends and holidays
from the state, most schools still charge parents a to pay for the fees. Dany, 15, said that he worked
monthly amount (known as the minerval) to cover every evening after school, but was forced to miss
their costs, such as teacher salaries, uniforms and school when he did not earn enough.125 Eddie, 14,
said that he started work at 6 am and was able to get
learning materials.121 In Kolwezi, NGO staff told
to school by 9 am.126 He said his parents sent him to
researchers, this amount varies between 10 - 30,000
work, “to contribute to the family, to pay school fees,
Congolese Francs (US$10-30) per month, which
buy uniform and books.”
is more than many can afford.122 The problem is
widespread across the whole of the former province
The physically demanding nature of the work that
of Katanga, despite its mineral wealth. In 2013, it
the children do, as well as the disruptions to their
had 1.3 million children aged 5-17 out of school in schooling when they or their parents don’t have the
2013, according to UNICEF.123 That was the largest money to pay the schools, can have negative effects
number of any province in the DRC. on children’s education.127
FREE PRIMARY EDUCATION
At least one charity is now running a project in Kolwezi to address the problem. Researchers interviewed 15 children
at a school in the Kanina area, which is run by a Catholic organisation, the Congregation of our Lady of Charity of
the Good Shepherd (known as Les Sœurs du Bon Pasteur). The school has also been supported by UNICEF and
World Vision. This school educates nearly 1000 boys and girls who worked in artisanal mines, whose families could
not afford to send them to school. Staff members visit the mines to persuade children to come to the school. The
number of pupils has doubled since was set up in 2013. Unlike other private or government-run schools in the DRC,
it is completely free, and it also provides one meal a day to all pupils.128 The manager said that this was enough
incentive for the children’s families to stop sending them to work and send them to school instead.
119. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
120. DRC Child Protection Code, 2009, Article 38, available at http://www.leganet.cd/Legislation/JO/2009/L.09.001.10.01.09.htm (accessed 16 July
2015).
121. UNICEF, To school, not to the mines: Investing in primary education in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 18 March 2013, available at www.
unicef.org/education/drcongo_68298.html (accessed 16 July 2015) (UNICEF, To school, not to the mines).
122. Amnesty International interview with Sister Nathalie Kangaj, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
123. UNICEF, To school, not to the mines.
124. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 12 May 2015.
125. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
126. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
127. Dr. Dorte Thorsen, Children working in mines and quarries: evidence from West and Central Africa, UNICEF, 2002.
128. Amnesty International interview with Pascal Bukengere Kanegeshe, school manager, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 33
III. FAILURE OF THE DRC explained that SAESSCAM is not “allowed to work in
non-official artisanal mining areas, because the law
GOVERNMENT TO PROTECT
stipulates that mining in these areas is illegal.”132
PEOPLE FROM HUMAN RIGHTS PriceWaterhouseCoopers (PWC) also stated, when it
audited the agency for the government in 2013 that
ABUSES
“SAESSCAM, according to its mandate, cannot
intervene in zones not established as ZEAs, as the
GAPS AND WEAKNESS IN REGULATION OF mining going on there is illegal.”133
ARTISANAL MINING
However, there is a shortage of ZEAs in the DRC’s
southern mining belt and most mining takes place in
As explained in Chapter one (Background), the
unauthorized zones.134 According to a list maintained
Mining Code (2002) and its regulations establish
by the Ministry of Mines in Kinshasa, there are only
that artisanal mining is only allowed to take place
32 ZEAs in the entire copper and cobalt mining
within authorized Zones d’exploitation artisanale
region of southern DRC. Of these, 26 were created in
(Artisanal Mining Zones or ZEAs) where industrial or
2014 and 2015, but it is unknown how many
semi-industrial mining is not viable.129 The Mining
of these are as yet operational.135 The head of
Code also sets out the minimum standards for how
SAESSCAM’s operations in the former province of
artisanal mining operations should be run. Miners
Katanga acknowledged that there were not enough
can lose their licenses (mining cards) if they break
ZEAs to accommodate the number of artisanal
these rules.130
miners there, but he assured researchers that the
government is committed to creating more of them.
The Service d’Assistance et d’Encadrement du Small
He warned that this was a lengthy and costly process
Scale Mining (SAESSCAM) is the government agency
and that his agency lacked resources to do so.136
set up to regulate artisanal mining and ensure that
it is conducted safely. Staff are present at ZEAs,
Miners, traders, NGO staff and some government
and are supposed to provide trainings and inspect
officials interviewed for this report also agreed that
tunnels, among other tasks. However, as explained
there were not enough ZEAs to support the large
below, there are significant gaps and weakness in the
number of people who relied on artisanal mining
government’s approach to and regulation of artisanal
for their livelihoods. Those which exist are often no
mining.
longer productive or are hard to access. For example
in Kolwezi, miners are only currently authorized
to mine at one location, Mutoshi.137 By contrast,
LACK OF AUTHORIZED AREAS FOR ARTISANAL
unauthorized mining was taking place in at least
MINERS
ten different locations in or around the city in May
2015, when researchers visited the city. Government
SAESSCAM’s mandate is limited to artisanal miners officials said that there were no functioning ZEAs in
working in the ZEAs. A Ministry of Mines official Kambove, and only two in Likasi.138
129. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 109.
130. Article 299 of the DRC Mining Code (2002) provides that any person engaging in illegal mining activities is liable for a fine of the local currency equiv-
alent of US$10,000 and US$250,000. Under Article 302, any person purchasing or selling minerals in contravention of the law will be liable for a fine
of the local currency equivalent of US$10,000 and US$30,000.
131. “Historique du SAESSCAM,” available at http://www.saesscam.cd/SAESSCAM/pages/historique.php (accessed 10 June 2015).
132. Amnesty International interview, DRC, 5 January 2016.
133. Ministère des Mines – Unité d’Exécution du Projet PROMINES, Audit du Cadre Institutionnel et Organisationnel régissant le Secteur des Mines, p. 35.
134. Amnesty International interviews with government officials, NGO staff, traders, representatives of mining co-operatives, DRC. May 2015.
135. See http://portals.flexicadastre.com/drc/en/ (accessed on 8 December 2015).
136. Amnesty International interview with the head of SAESSCAM in Katanga, Lubumbashi, 18 May 2015.
137. Information provided by DRC based NGO, May 2015.
138. Amnesty International interview with government officials, 15-16 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

34 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
OFFICIALS EXTORT ILLEGAL PAYMENTS FROM ARTISANAL MINERS
The fact that most artisanal mining is taking place outside of ZEAs does not mean that it is hidden from the government.
Not only are state officials aware of the mining activities taking place in unauthorized locations, but they also benefit
from them, according to miners and representatives of miners’ cooperatives. Officials from a range of different
government and security agencies control access to these mine sites and demand money from miners, they said.
Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers saw state agents at three mines they visited which are not ZEAs.
In Kasulo, they saw uniformed police and were approached by two men out of uniform, and one in uniform, who said
that they were members of the mines police, which is charged with ensuring security at mine sites. These men told
the researchers to leave the area as foreigners were not allowed to visit mines sites without official permission, and
demanded that the researchers pay a fine. Miners working in Kasulo told researchers that the police checked every
vehicle leaving the neighbourhood and they had to pay them for each sack of ore.139 There is a police station and
check post on the road leading from Kasulo into central Kolwezi city, where vehicles containing the ore are stopped,
researchers observed.
At Kapata, where families, including young children, wash and sort ore in a lake, researchers met an agent of
SAESSCAM, who could not have failed to see the children working because he was so close to them. People washing
ore there said that they had to pay him 500 Congolese Francs (approximately US$0.50) a day to work there.140 At a
site in Kambove where researchers saw women and children washing ore, a uniformed policeman was present. The
Presidential Guard (Garde Républicaine) is also present at artisanal mine sites and at buying houses in Kambove,
according to multiple interviews with miners and traders.141 These miners and traders also said that the Agence
National de Renseignements (ANR, the government intelligence agency) had agents at mine sites. According to an
artisanal miner with 20 years’ experience at different mines:
“There are always the Mines Police, SAESSCAM and the ANR, also the Ministry of Mines. You have to pay
these state agents when you want to transport the minerals out of the mine. They do not give receipts for
the payments.”142
A Ministry of Mines official in the former province of Katanga, confirmed to researchers that none of these agencies,
including SAESSCAM, are authorized to collect payments (referred to in the mining areas as “taxes”) from artisanal
miners.143
These findings are backed up by research by other organisations. The PriceWaterhouseCoopers audit of SAESSCAM
said that the collection of illegal taxes damaged its reputation with miners.144 It cited an EU-funded study conducted
in Kolwezi in 2011 which found that SAESSCAM charged a variety of illegal taxes, for example on the transport of
minerals and as a fee for resolving conflicts between miners.145
A recent report on artisanal gold mining in eastern DRC by the Open Society Initiative for Southern Africa, concluded
that SAESSCAM:
139. Amnesty International interview with miners, Kasulo, 10 May 2015.
140. Amnesty International interview with women washing ore, Kapata, 12 May 2015.
141. Amnesty International interviews with miners and traders, Kambove, 15 May 2015.
142. Amnesty International interview, 15 May 2015.
143. Amnesty International interview, 5 January 2016.
144. Ministère des Mines – Unité d’Exécution du Projet PROMINES, Audit du Cadre Institutionnel et Organisationnel régissant le Secteur des Mines, p. 3.
145. Ministère des Mines – Unité d’Exécution du Projet PROMINES, Audit du Cadre Institutionnel et Organisationnel régissant le Secteur des Mines, p. 32-33.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 35
“was established to support miners but its underpaid – or often unpaid – agents simply extort ‘taxes’, ‘levies’
and other ‘fees’ without providing any services in return. The government must totally restructure the
institution or close it down.”146
A 2010 study of artisanal mining in Kolwezi by Pact Inc. found that only a small minority (less than 3 percent) of
miners paid the correct legal taxes, while all were regularly required to pay illegal “taxes”, including:
“taxes to enter and leave the mines; payments to work in the actual pits; payments to have their minerals
registered; the police; the Guard Industrielle of Gécamines; and the traditional chiefs.”147
The evidence suggests that the state officials are extorting illegal payments from artisanal miners, while turning a
blind eye to the unsafe conditions in which miners work that breach DRC’s own laws, including the prohibition on
child labour in mines.
LACK OF ADEQUATE SAFETY AND LABOUR traded, as discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. Licensed
STANDARDS buying houses are required to buy mineral ore from
licensed artisanal miners, but are not obliged by law
to ask any other questions such as the exact location
Worker rights in the DRC are enshrined in the country’s
of where the mineral was mined nor about the
Labour Code (2002).148 This includes regulations
conditions of extraction, such as whether children
on working hours, salaries, and health and safety. It
were involved.152
prohibits employment under the age of 16, and bans
“the worst forms of child labour.”
The government says it is currently in the process of
revising the 2002 Mining Code, and has invited civil
As noted above, the DRC’s mining law includes a
society and industry groups to provide advice.153 A
set of regulations, including a “code of conduct for
draft of the code includes an article on human rights:
artisanal mining,” which impose environmental and
other obligations on artisanal miners.149 However,
“It is illegal to mine or sell minerals coming
this contains almost no provisions which protect
from a site where the contravention/violation
their labour rights – they merely provide a few points of the laws governing the protection of human
of simple guidance on health and safety, such as rights, the rights of children or women’s
banning the use of explosives, and limiting the depth rights have been the object of a written
of tunnels to 30m.150 These regulations are supposed report by a competent authority.”154
to be enforced by Ministry of Mines officials,
specifically from SAESSCAM.151 The Mining Code This is a good opportunity for the government to clarify
also established the rules for how minerals are laws governing artisanal mining, to ensure that better
146. Open Society Initiative for Southern Africa, Conflict Gold to Criminal Gold: The new face of artisanal gold mining in Congo, 2012, available at http://
www.osisa.org/other/economic-justice/drc/conflict-gold-criminal-gold-new-face-artisanal-gold-mining-congo.
147. Pact Inc., PROMINES Study, p. 86-7.
148. The DRC Labour Code (2002), available at www.droit-afrique.com/images/textes/RDC/RDC%20-%20Code%20du%20travail%202002.pdf (accessed 7
January 2016) (DRC Labour Code).
149. DRC Mining Regulations (2003).
150. DRC Mining Regulations (2003), Article 2.
151. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 14, “The Directorate of Mines is responsible for inspecting and supervising mining activities and quarry works with
regard to safety, health, work procedures, production, transport, sale and social matters.”
152. DRC Mining Code (2002) Art 116-117.
153. Franz Wild, Congo submits draft mining code in face of industry opposition, 11 February 2015, available at http://www.bloomberg.com/news/arti-
cles/2015-02-11/congo-submits-draft-mining-code-in-face-of-industry-opposition (accessed 23 December 2015).
154. Draft Mining Code available at http://congomines.org/reports/765-projet-de-loi-2015-sur-la-revision-du-code-minier
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

36 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
protections are put in place. Further guidance is Assessments by other NGOs and the US Department
needed on labour and safety standards which should of Labor have also pointed to the lack of resources
be followed by all artisanal miners. However as within the labour inspectorate and the lack of
discussed below, there is also a need for greater clarity monitoring and follow up on reports of child labour.158
on which governmental agency will monitor compliance The US Department of Labor has noted:
with such standards and provide support and training
to artisanal miners. One article on human rights is not “[l]abor inspectors often do not have adequate
sufficient to meet the substantial gaps in regulations. funding, staff, facilities, communications infrastructure,
The government also needs to address the complicity and means of transportation to conduct inspections…
of officials who turn a blind eye to the dangerous Labor inspectors did not receive training on the worst
conditions in which many artisanal miners work forms of child labor during 2014… The MOL [Ministry
while still extorting illegal payments from them. of Labour] does not have a system to track child
labor complaints and did not keep records of child
labor investigations during the reporting period…
LACK OF CAPACITY AMONGST GOVERNMENTAL
Information on the number of complaints, inspections,
AGENCIES TO ADEQUATE MONITOR AND
citations, and prosecutions related to child labor is
ENFORCE STANDARDS not publicly available.”159
The Ministry of Labour is responsible for ensuring The agency with the clearest mandate to enforce
effective implementation of the DRC Labour Code. government rules in artisanal mines is, as stated
This includes inspecting worksites for child labour, earlier, SAESSCAM. Its objectives include:160
and ensuring that they abide by health and safety
rules.155 • To provide training and technical and financial
assistance to miners.
Researchers came across no examples of labour • To monitor the flow of materials from mines to
inspectors ever monitoring artisanal mining sites, the point of sale.
whether these are authorized or unauthorized, in the • To ensure the collection of after-sales tax.
former province of Katanga. One reason is a lack of • To encourage the creation of miners’ co-operatives.
capacity. In 2014, the ministry only employed 20 • To provide guidance on security at artisanal mining
inspectors for the entire mining region of the former sites and ensure that this is observed.
province of Katanga.156 The head of a NGO based in
southern DRC explained that, SAESSCAM officials in Kolwezi, Likasi and
Lubumbashi described to researchers the activities
“The labour inspectors focus on companies that the agency undertakes to improve worker
[rather than artisanal mine sites]. Every city safety.161 They include training miners in how to
has one labour inspector, but each territory construct safe mines, inspecting mines to ensure
that they are responsible for is vast and they they are safe, establishing and training police units
can’t afford to travel.”157 to patrol mining areas, and mediating between
155. DRC Labour Code (2002), Article 187.
156. US Department of Labor, 2014 Findings on the Worst Form of Child Labor, p. 4. www.dol.gov/ilab/reports/child-labor/congo_democratic_republic.htm
(US Department of Labor, 2014 Findings on the Worst Form of Child Labor).
157. Email correspondence, 25 December 2015.
158. See for instance, Pact Inc, Breaking the Chain: Ending the Supply of Child-Mined Minerals, p12, 2013, available at: http://www.pactworld.org/sites/
default/files/PACT%20Child%20Labor%20Report%20English%202013.pdf.
159. US Labour Department of Labor, 2014 Findings on the Worst Form of Child Labor, p. 4.
160. “Décret n°047-C/2003 du 28 mars 2003 portant création et Status d’un service Public dénommé Service d’Assistance et d’Encadrement du Small
Scale Mining ou Production Minière à Petite Echelle, en sigle “ SAESSCAM,” available at http://www.saesscam.cd/SAESSCAM/pages/creation.php.
(accesesed 9 October 2015).
161. Amnesty International interviews, 11 and 15 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 37
groups of miners when disputes arise. SAESSCAM (2002) outlaws “the worst forms of child labour.”165
supports the setting up of miners’ co-operatives However, as discussed above, the DRC government is
which manage the mine sites, seek investors and failing to adequately enforce these laws in artisanal
negotiate the sale of minerals. However, as noted mines.
earlier, PriceWaterhouseCoopers was highly critical
of SAESSCAM’s performance when it audited the Under the DRC’s constitution and a recently enacted
agency for the government in 2013. It said that the law, primary education is meant to be compulsory
agency lacked “a strategic plan,” that it suffered from and free.166 However, the lack of adequate funding
a lack of human resources and logistical support, by the state to schools, fees and other financial
and that its staff prioritized the collection of taxes barriers prevent children from accessing primary
from artisanal miners above all of their other tasks.162 education. Various UN human rights monitoring
It is not clear what actions the government has taken bodies as well as ILO expert bodies have repeatedly
to improve SAESSCAM’s performance since this called on the government to improve the functioning
audit was conducted. of the education system and to ensure access to
primary education.167 For example, in 2009, the
Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended
FAILURE TO PROTECT CHILDREN FROM that the government “[e]nsure access to primary
HAZARDOUS WORK AND TO ENSURE THEIR education, free of charge, including any additional
RIGHT TO EDUCATION (non-tuition) costs to all children without discrimination”
and that “the State party prioritize the improvement
As discussed earlier in this chapter, child labour is of primary school enrolment and the prevention of
common in the unauthorized artisanal cobalt mines dropouts with a view to eliminating the worst forms
of the DRC. The nature of work that the children of child labour”.168
do may involve working underground, transporting
heavy loads, exposure to hazardous substances, Despite recent improvements in the proportion of
risk of physical abuse, and working under difficult children attending school, the DRC is still amongst
conditions including long hours of work. Such work the countries with the highest number of children
“is likely to harm the health … [and] safety … of who are out of school, estimated by UNESCO to be
children” and constitutes one of the worst forms of “well above 2 million.”169
child labour.163
In 2011, the DRC developed a national action
Child labour in the mines is illegal in the DRC. The plan to eliminate the worst forms of child labour
Mining Code (2002) bans anyone under 18 from by 2020.170 Among other things, this plan aims to
engaging in artisanal mining.164 The Labour Code strengthen the Labour Ministry so that it can deploy
162. Ministère des Mines – Unité d’Exécution du Projet PROMINES, Audit du Cadre Institutionnel et Organisationnel régissant le Secteur des Mines, p.
163. ILO, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182), Article 3(d).
164. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 23.
165. DRC Labour Code (2002), Article 3.
166. Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Article 43, and DRC Child Protection Code, 2009 (Loi no 09/001 du 10 janvier 2009 portant
protection de l’enfant), Article 38 available at http://www.leganet.cd/Legislation/JO/2009/L.09.001.10.01.09.htm (accessed 9 October 2015).
167. See for instance, ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations, Observation on a Direct Request, Worst Forms
of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No.182), Democratic Republic of Congo, adopted 2014, published 104th ILC session (2015), available at: http://
www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:13100:0::NO:13100:P13100_COMMENT_ID:3185795 (accessed 7 January 2015 (ILO Committee of Experts
on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations, Observation on a Direct Request, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No.182),
Democratic Republic of Congo, adopted 2014, published 104th ILC session (2015)); and Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Con-
cluding Observations: Democratic Republic of the Congo, UN Doc. E/C.12/COD/CO/4, 20 November 2009, para. 35.
168. Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations: Democratic Republic of Congo, UN Doc. CRC/C/COD/CO/2, 10 February 2009, paras
66 (a) and 81.
169. Direct Request (CEACR) - adopted 2013, published 103rd ILC session (2014) Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138) - Democratic Republic of
the Congo (Ratification: 2001).
170. Plan d’Action National (Pan) de Lutte Contre Les Pires Formes de Travail des Enfants en République démocratique du Congo,” available at http://www.
ilo.org/dyn/natlex/docs/MONOGRAPH/94977/111643/F-2051372699/COD-94977.pdf (accessed 6 January 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

38 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
more inspectors, and ensure free and compulsory article 7 of the Covenant. These fundamental rights
education for all children below the age of 16, also include respect for the physical and mental
which is the national minimum age for employment. integrity of the worker in the exercise of his/her
However, this plan is yet to be formally adopted employment.”174 The Committee has stressed that
and implemented by the government,171 despite states must reduce the number of workers outside
recommendations from ILO monitoring bodies for the the formal economy, who as a result of that situation
government to adopt and fund the plan as a matter have no protection.175
of urgency.172
The right to health,176 amongst other things, requires
governments to improve “all aspects of environmental
VIOLATIONS OF THE DRC’S and industrial hygiene” and to prevent, treat and
control occupational diseases. The Committee on
INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has clarified
the obligations of states to undertake preventive
The DRC is a state party to various international measures in respect of occupational accidents and
and regional treaties, which require it to protect the diseases. The Committee has stated that this includes
rights of all persons to and at work, health, education, “the prevention and reduction of the population’s
and an adequate standard of living, and children exposure to harmful substances such as radiation
from work which is dangerous to their health or safety. and harmful chemicals or other detrimental
These treaties include the International Covenant on environmental conditions that directly or indirectly
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Convention on impact upon human health. Furthermore, industrial
the Rights of the Child, Convention on the Elimination hygiene refers to the minimization, so far as is
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, reasonably practicable, of the causes of health
ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, ILO hazards inherent in the working environment.”177
Minimum Age Convention and the African Charter on The Committee has clarified that a government will
Human and Peoples Rights. violate its obligation to protect when it fails to take
all necessary measures to safeguard persons within
The government of the DRC has to ensure the right its jurisdiction from infringements of their right to
of all persons to work, to just conditions of work health by third parties. “This category includes such
and to safe and healthy working conditions. 173 The omissions as the failure to regulate the activities of
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights individuals, groups or corporations so as to prevent
has emphasised that “[w]ork as specified in article them from violating the right to health of others;
6 of the Covenant must be decent work. This is work [and] the failure to protect … workers from practices
that respects the fundamental rights of the human detrimental to health”.178
person as well as the rights of workers in terms of
conditions of work safety and remuneration. It also Children have the right to be protected from economic
provides an income allowing workers to support exploitation and “performing any work that is likely
themselves and their families as highlighted in to be hazardous or to interfere with the child’s
171. Email UNICEF child protection officer, 6 January 2015.
172. ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations, Observation, Minimum Age Convention, 1973 (No. 138), Demo-
cratic Republic of the Congo, adopted 2014, published 104th ILC session (2015).
173. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), Articles 6 and 7; African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights (ACHPR),
Article 15; and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Article 11.
174. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR), General Comment No. 18: The Right to Work, UN Doc. E/C.12/GC/18, 6 February 2006,
para 7.
175. CESCR, General Comment No. 18: The Right to Work, UN Doc. E/C.12/GC/18, 6 February 2006, para 10.
176. ICESCR, Article 12; and ACHPR, Article 16.
177. CESCR, General Comment No. 14: The right to the highest attainable standard of health (article 2), UN Doc. E/C.12/2000/4, 11 August 2000, para 15.
178. CESCR, General Comment No. 14: The right to the highest attainable standard of health (article 2), UN Doc. E/C.12/2000/4, 11 August 2000, Para 51.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 39
education, or to be harmful to the child’s health operations, and this report includes evidence of state
or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social officials extorting illegal payments from artisanal
development.”179 As noted earlier, the DRC is also a miners, while turning a blind eye to the unsafe
party to the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention conditions in which miners work. The government
which requires governments to take immediate and should create more ZEAs and regularise unauthorized
effective measures to secure the prohibition and mining areas, wherever this is possible. Where this is
elimination of the worst forms of child labour.180 not possible for safety or other considerations, the
Children are defined as all persons under the age of government should support artisanal miners in finding
18181 and ‘the worst forms of child labour’ comprises other authorized sites and help create alternative
amongst others, “work which, by its nature or the employment options. It should extend and enforce
circumstances in which it is carried out, is likely to labour and safety protections, and provide support in
harm the health, safety or morals of children.”182 realising these protections, to all artisanal miners.
All persons have the right to education and the The government has failed to put in place an
government must ensure that primary education is adequate system to monitor and enforce the labour
compulsory and available free to all.183 standards that exist, including on the worst forms
of child labour. There continues to be a serious gap
The government of the DRC is failing to meet its between the age of compulsory education and the
obligations to protect people from abuses of their minimum age of employment, increasing children’s
rights to and at work and health through its failure vulnerability to ending up in the worst forms of child
to put in place and enforce adequate safeguards for labour. The government has yet to remove financial
artisanal miners working in unauthorized areas. and other barriers that children face in accessing
The government has historically encouraged artisanal primary education, and to ensure that all children are
miners but has failed to adequately recognise and able to access free and compulsory primary education.
protect the labour rights of all artisanal miners. It It is essential that the government adopt and implement
has not created sufficient ZEAs where artisanal the national action plan to eliminate the worst forms
miners can operate, leaving people in a situation of child labour, as a matter of urgency.
where they have to work in unauthorized areas, often
in unsafe working conditions in which they have high The DRC has ratified ILO Convention 81, which
levels of exposure to chemicals which can be requires states to have an adequately resourced
dangerous to their health. State officials are fully aware labour inspection system to ensure the protection of
of and often present in these unauthorized mining workers.184
179. Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 32; and ICESCR, Article 10. The DRC is also a party to the ILO Minimum Age Convention (No. 138)
which requires governments ensure that no child under 18 is subject to any employment which, by its nature or the circumstances in which it is carried
out, is likely to harm the health and safety of children.
180. ILO, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182), Article 1.
181. ILO, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182), Article 2.
182. ILO, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (No. 182), Article 3 (d).
183. ICESCR, Article 13; Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 28; and ACHPR, Article 28; and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, Article 10.
184. ILO, Labour Inspection Convention (No. 81), 1947 (available at http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:12100:0::NO:12100:P12100_INSTRU-
MENT_ID:312226) (accessed 7 January 2016)
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

40 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
“know and show” that they comply with their
responsibility to respect human rights, companies
3. DUE DILIGENCE:
must carry out human rights due diligence. This is a
process “to identify, prevent, mitigate and account
A CORPORATE
for how they address their impacts on human rights.”187
INTERNATIONAL HUMAN This responsibility extends to companies’ global
mineral supply chains. Therefore, in line with current
RIGHTS STANDARD international standards, it is expected that all companies
that purchase cobalt, or components that contain it,
must conduct supply chain due diligence.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Companies have a responsibility to respect human
Development (OECD) has provided a practical guide
rights wherever they operate in the world. Their
for how such due diligence should be carried out
responsibility is laid out in the UN Guiding Principles
on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs).185 The through its Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible
corporate responsibility to respect human rights Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and
exists independently of a state’s ability or willingness High-Risk Areas (OECD Guidance).188 In 2010, 34
to fulfil its own human rights obligations.186 This OECD member states approved the OECD Guidance.189
means that if a state where a company operates, The International Conference on the Great Lakes
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo Region (ICGLR), a regional body, including the DRC,
(DRC), lacks the necessary regulatory framework or then endorsed it.190 Nine non-OECD members have
is unable or unwilling to enforce applicable laws to also adhered to the OECD Guidance.191 More recently,
protect human rights from abuse, the company must China recognized the guidance as an international
still act to ensure respect for human rights in their standard for conducting responsible mineral supply
operations. chain due diligence.192
The UNGPs require that companies “do no harm” The widespread adoption of the OECD Guidance
or, in other words, take pro-active steps to ensure points to a growing global recognition that companies
that they do not cause or contribute to human rights should carry out responsible supply chain practices
abuses within their global operations and respond when sourcing minerals from conflict affected or
to any human rights abuses when they do occur. To high-risk areas. The application of this standard to
185. The UNGPs were developed by John Ruggie, the former Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and transnational
corporations and other business enterprises. They were endorsed by the UN Human Rights Council in 2011. UN Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework
(2011) UN Doc HR/PUB/11/04, available at www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf - (accessed 18 December
2015) (UNGPs).
186. UNGPs, Commentary to Principle 11.
187. UNGPs, Principle 15(b) and 17. These principles have also been reflected in the Human Rights Chapter of the revised OECD Guidelines for Multi-
national Enterprises. As of 2011, this contains a human rights chapter detailing the due diligence steps companies must take to ensure they respect
human rights in their global operations. OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (2011) available at: http://mneguidelines.oecd.org/text/
188. Currently, detailed supplements exist for tin, tantalum, tungsten (the “3Ts”) and gold. See OECD, OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Sup-
ply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas: Second Edition, 2013, available at www.oecd.org/corporate/mne/GuidanceEdition2.
pdf (accessed 18 July 2015) (OECD Guidance); OECD, Recommendation of the Council on Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High Risk Areas, 2012, available at webnet.oecd.org/OECDACTS/Instruments/ShowInstrumentView.aspx?Instru-
mentID=268&InstrumentPID=302&Lang=en&Book=False (accessed 18 July 2015).
189. http://www.oecd.org/corporate/mne/mining.htm (accessed 18 December 2015).
190. Lusaka Declaration, adopted on 15 December 2010; these states include: Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, available at http://www.oecd.org/daf/inv/mne/47143500.pdf (accessed 18
December 2015).
191. These are Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Latvia, Lithuania, Morocco, Peru and Romania. See http://mneguidelines.oecd.org/mining.htm
(accessed 18 December 2015). In addition, current efforts are being undertaken by the OECD to encourage the implementation of the OECD Guidance
to mining companies operating in India.
192. The China Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals and Chemicals Importers & Exporters, Chinese Due Diligence Guidelines for Responsible Mineral
Supply Chains, 2 December 2015, p. 6-7, available at http://mneguidelines.oecd.org/chinese-due-diligence-guidelines-for-responsible-mineral-sup-
ply-chains.htm (accessed 18 December 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 41
companies domiciled and/or operating in the OECD DUE DILIGENCE AND THE TRADE
Member States, endorsing States and adhering
IN MINERALS
states referenced above is clear. For those companies
domiciled and/or operating in other countries,
The OECD Guidance applies to all minerals and all
the OECD Guidance can be used to show how the
companies throughout the mineral supply chain and
UNGPs can be put into practice by companies
sets out the five steps that companies should take to
sourcing minerals as its due diligence framework is ensure they respect human rights and avoid financing
consistent with that of the UNGPs. While the OECD conflict when sourcing minerals from conflict-affected
Guidance is not legally binding, it gives companies or high-risk areas.195 The OECD Guidance defines due
diligence as “an on-going, proactive and reactive
more detailed instructions on the steps required to
process through which companies can ensure that they
conduct human rights due diligence when extracting
respect human rights and do not contribute to conflict.”
or sourcing from conflict-affected or high-risk areas.
All countries, whether they are OECD members or not,
The OECD Guidance is stated to apply to all conflict-
should act in line with this guidance. As illustrated affected and high-risk areas. It defines a high-risk
above, many have already stated their support for it. area as one that
“…may include areas of political instability
The purpose of the OECD Guidance is to ensure that
or repression, institutional weakness,
companies are not profiting from, or contributing to,
insecurity, collapse of civil infrastructure
serious human rights abuses in the mines that they
and widespread violence. Such areas are
source from, or anywhere else along their supply often characterised by widespread human
chains. The OECD Guidance also aims to ensure that rights abuses and violations of national or
companies are transparent about what they are doing international law.”196
to identify and address human rights issues. Accordingly,
According to the OECD’s definition, the region of
companies must be able to demonstrate that they
southern DRC featured in this report (previously
source their minerals responsibly. What constitutes
known as Katanga) would constitute a “high-risk
responsible action is provided by the OECD Guidance
area”. This is because of the presence of factors
itself and varies depending on the company’s including political instability, institutional weaknesses,
position in the supply chain. A model supply chain insecurity, lack of protections for human rights, and
intermittent episodes of violence.197
policy is annexed to the OECD Guidance that lists
serious abuses which companies should be aware
The practical five-step framework for supply chain
of and prepared to address.193 This is intended to
due diligence set out in the OECD Guidance states
provide a “common reference for companies”194 and
that companies should: establish strong company
as such the list is not exhaustive of all human rights management systems; identify and assess risks in
risks that a company may face. the supply chain; design and implement a strategy
193. OECD Guidance, Annex II: Model Supply Chain Policy, p. 20, section 1. States that “….we [companies] will not tolerate nor by any means profit from,
contribute to, assist with or facilitate … iii) the worst forms of child labour.”
194. OECD Guidance, Annex II: Model Supply Chain Policy, p. 20 Footnote1.
195. OECD Guidance, p. 3; OECD, Recommendation of the Council on Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High Risk Areas, 17 July 2012.
196. OECD Guidance, p. 13.
197. For an assessment of human rights conditions in the DRC, see UN General Assembly, Third joint report of seven United Nations experts on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, March 9, 2011, available at http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/HRC/16/68
(accessed 18 December 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

42 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
to respond to identified risks; carry out independent all those companies that buy the cobalt, or
third-party audits of supply chain due diligence at manufacture or sell components or products that
identified points in the supply chain; and publicly contain cobalt, after it has been processed. These
report on supply chain due diligence policies and include the brands that eventually sell products to
practices.198 the consumers.
The OECD recognizes that companies at different The OECD Guidance also includes detailed, specific
stages of the supply chain have different responsibilities. due diligence guidance for the tin, tantalum and
It divides these into two categories: so-called tungsten as well as gold (often referred to as “3T and
“upstream” and “downstream” companies. Upstream gold”) sectors, tailored to upstream and downstream
companies include smelters and traders in the country companies. The 3T supplement is relevant for the
where the mineral is found (i.e. buying houses and cobalt supply chain since the ores also go through a
international traders who purchase and process smelting process, unlike gold, which does not.
cobalt in the DRC). Downstream companies include
Flow chart of generic supply chain
$
CONTRACT
SMELTER / COMPONENT ELECTRONICS AND
MINE TRADER MANUFACTURER /
REFINER PRODUCER CAR COMPANIES
ASSEMBLY
UPSTREAM DOWNSTREAM
UPSTREAM COMPANY trade, handling and export.”199 Upstream companies
should provide the information that they gather to
RESPONSIBILITIES
their downstream customers.
Upstream companies (as defined above) are expected Additionally, these upstream companies should take
under the OECD Guidance to trace the source of the steps to identify, assess and manage human rights
mineral back to the point of extraction, mapping the abuses in their supply chain. For example, they
circumstances of its extraction, trade, handling and should “minimise the risk of exposure of artisanal
export. They should establish “on-the-ground miners to abusive practices, by supporting host
assessment teams…for generating and sharing countries governments’ efforts for the progressive
verifiable, reliable, up-to-date information on the professionalization and formalisation of the artisanal
qualitative circumstances of mineral extraction, sector.”200
198. OECD Guidance, p. 17-19.
199. OECD Guidance, p. 32.
200. OECD Guidance, p.27.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 43
DOWNSTREAM COMPANY operations. This requires that a company do more
than simply discontinuing a trading relationship with
RESPONSIBILITIES
a supplier or embargoing DRC cobalt once human
rights risks have been identified in the supply chain.
“Downstream” companies (as defined above) should Once this occurs, a company must itself take steps
be able to trace the cobalt in their products back based on the situation, in cooperation with other
to the company which refined it. Unlike upstream relevant actors, such as its suppliers, other downstream
companies, they are not expected under the OECD companies, national authorities, NGOs, international
Guidance to trace the cobalt in their products all agencies, and home state governments, to ensure
the way back to the mines in the DRC. Downstream that the harm suffered by workers and others affected
companies should instead “review the due diligence by abuses are remediated. For example, this would
process of the smelters/refiners in their supply chain mean putting in place a coordinated action plan with
and assess whether they adhere to due diligence national authorities, and with the help of international
measures put forward in the OECD Guidance.”201 They agencies and NGOs as relevant, to remove children
should then take steps to mitigate any identified from hazardous work, ensure that children are able
risks, for example by working with the smelter or to access education, provide support to children and,
refiner to improve their due diligence performance as appropriate, their families, and to monitor the
and practices. These activities can be undertaken
situation of the children. This responsibility to remediate
with other suppliers in the industry or through industry-
continues even when a company suspends or
wide initiatives, although each company remains
discontinues a trading relationship with a supplier.203
responsible for its own due diligence.
With regards to responding to human rights abuses,
BRINGING HUMAN RIGHTS
the OECD Guidance requires downstream companies
to use their leverage over upstream suppliers “who SUPPLY CHAIN DUE DILIGENCE
can most effectively and most directly mitigate the
INTO LAW
risks of adverse impacts.”202
No legal system in the world currently requires
RESPONSIBILITY OF ALL companies in the cobalt supply chain to carry out
due diligence or disclose their efforts, despite limited
COMPANIES IN THE SUPPLY
legislation calling for disclosure of information on
CHAIN TO TAKE CORRECTIVE other minerals coming from the DRC and neighbouring
countries.
ACTION
In 2012, the DRC itself incorporated the OECD
The UNGPs additionally make clear that companies Guidance into national law for tin, tantalum, tungsten
have a responsibility to mitigate and take corrective and gold, thereby requiring companies in the 3T
measures for the victims if they have failed to and gold supply chain in the DRC to conduct due
respect human rights at any point during their diligence.204 These minerals (often described as
201. OECD Guidance, p. 33.
202. OECD Guidance, p. 45.
203. OECD Guidance, Annex II: Model Supply Chain Policy, p. 20, section 2. Risk mitigation should be interpreted in conjunction with the corporate responsibility
to remedy human rights abuses within their supply chain.
204. 204 Arrêté Ministériel n° 0057 du 29 février 2012 portant mise en oeuvre du Mécanisme Régional de Certification de la Conférence Internationale sur
la Région des Grands Lacs “CIRGL” en République Démocratique du Congo, 2012, available at http://mines-rdc.cd/fr/documents/Arrete_0057_2012.
pdf (accessed 18 December 2015) (Arrêté Ministériel n° 0057 du 29 février 2012).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

44 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
“conflict minerals”) were chosen because of their endorsed by nine non-OECD countries and the eleven
documented links to armed groups and the fuelling member states of the ICGLR. It has recently been
of conflict in eastern DRC.205 Additionally, the OECD recognized as an international standard on supply
has produced detailed supplements which companies chain due diligence by China. Yet while it is currently
trading in these minerals in the DRC could follow. the most instructive international standard on
The Congolese law states that new minerals can be conducting responsible due diligence in mineral
added to the list requiring mandatory due diligence, supply chains, it is not in itself legally binding.
following a decision by the regional body, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region States can however take steps to legally require
(ICGLR).206 compliance with the OECD Guidance. A major landmark
in how downstream companies address their mineral
Currently, and until cobalt is added to this list, its supply chains came in January 2013.210 This was
trade within the DRC is governed by the Mining Code when a US law came into force (known as the Dodd-
(2002). This requires all traders of cobalt within the Frank Act Section 1502) obliging certain US-listed
DRC to hold valid licences, issued by the provincial companies to investigate their supply chains to
government.207 Traders must keep records of every check if the 3T and gold in their products are funding
transaction, recording the date, place of origin (to armed groups or fuelling human rights abuses in the
the level of town, but not mine) and name of the DRC and neighbouring countries.211 These companies
seller as well as the quantity, quality and price of were also obliged to report publicly on this. As with
purchased or sold minerals.208 They are obliged to the DRC’s law, this US legislation does not cover
buy only from licensed artisanal miners.209 However, other minerals such as cobalt, although the scope of
they are not obliged to ask any questions about the the law can be extended to “any other mineral or its
exact location of where the mineral was mined nor derivatives determined by the Secretary of State to
about the conditions of extraction, such as whether be financing conflict in the Democratic Republic of
children were involved. These are obvious weaknesses the Congo or an adjoining country.”212
in the law in that they do not require reporting nor
disclosure of this type of information, which would More recently, in October 2014, the OECD signed
be essential for identifying, preventing and mitigating a Memorandum of Understanding with the Chinese
against human rights risks associated with the Chamber of Commerce of Metals Minerals & Chemicals
extraction of and trade in cobalt. Importers & Exporters (CCCMC), in order to promote
the OECD Guidance in China. The CCCMC has since
The DRC is not the only State required under published its own voluntary due diligence code.213
international human rights law to prevent corporate- This complements other Chinese regulatory measures
related human rights abuses within its territory. that can be used for cobalt trading. Under Article 5
of the Measures for the Administration of Overseas
As discussed earlier, the OECD Guidance has been Investment (“the Measures”), the Ministry of Commerce
approved by all 34 OECD Member States and for the Government of the People’s Republic of
205. UN Security Council, Report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 2001, available at http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/2001/357 (accessed 18 December 2015).
206. Arrêté Ministériel n° 0057 du 29 février 2012.
207. DRC Mining Code (2002), Articles 116-7.
208. DRC Mining Regulations (2003), Article 250.
209. DRC Mining Code (2002), Article 116.
210. Although the Dodd-Frank Act was passed in January 2010, companies were only required to comply with section 1502 once the US Securities &
Exchange Commission issued a final implementing rule – this rule came into effect in January 2013.
211. Section 1502, Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, 2010. http://www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@swaps/documents/file/
hr4173_enrolledbill.pdf (accessed 18 December 2015) (Section 1502, Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act).
212. Section 1502, Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act).
213. The China Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals and Chemicals Importers & Exporters, Chinese Due Diligence Guidelines for Responsible Mineral
Supply Chains, 2 December 2015, available at: http://mneguidelines.oecd.org/chinese-due-diligence-guidelines-for-responsible-mineral-supply-chains.
htm (accessed 18 December 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 45
China (MOFCOM) and its provincial departments to influence these third parties by legal or political
are responsible for regulating foreign investment by means.217 These States are typically, though not
Chinese companies.214 In this capacity, they manage exclusively, the States in whose territory multinational
and oversee the operations of Chinese companies companies are domiciled or headquartered (commonly
that have been certified to invest overseas. This referred to as the “home states”). The scope of this
includes the ability to evaluate whether a company
duty has been further defined in recent years through
is performing its “social responsibilities” as required
UN human rights mechanisms, and the work of
under Article 20 of the Measures.215
international law experts.218 In essence, States’
extraterritorial obligations require that they take
The European Union (EU) is currently considering
measures to prevent companies incorporated or
legislation that could require companies in Europe to
headquartered in their jurisdiction from causing or
undertake due diligence on their 3T and gold supply
contributing to human rights abuses in other countries.
chain in accordance with the OECD Guidance.216
The parameters of such regulation should include
In addition to specific state-based measures around
requirements that the company carries out adequate
mineral supply chains, there is a separate duty on
due diligence, discloses its policies and practices
States to protect human rights in the context of
business activity which has an extraterritorial (including any identified risks and how they were
dimension. The UN Committee on Economic, Social managed) and acts upon it, with the express intention
and Cultural Rights has clarified that States have a of preventing the company’s operations in any
duty to prevent third parties – such as companies – country from causing or contributing to human
from violating human rights abroad, if they are able rights abuses.
214. “The Ministry of Commerce and the commerce departments in each province, autonomous region, directly administered municipality, separately listed
planning cities, and the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps (hereafter, “province-level commerce departments”) are responsible for carrying
out management and oversight of overseas investment.” Measures for the Administration of Overseas Investment, Ministry of Commerce of the People’s
Republic of China, Article 5.
215. ‘Companies shall require their enterprises investing overseas to observe the laws and regulations of the host location, respect local culture and tradi-
tions, perform social responsibilities, do well in environmental and labour protection and the development of company culture, and promote assimi-
lation into the local community.’ Measures for the Administration of Overseas Investment, Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China,
Article 20. See: Articles 26 and 27 for the role of MOFCOM.
216. European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council setting up a Union system for supply chain due dili-
gence self-certification of responsible importers of tin, tantalum and tungsten, their ores, and gold originating in conflict-affected and high-risk areas,
2014, available at http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2014/march/tradoc_152227.pdf (accessed 18 December 2015).
217. CESCR, General Comment 15 on the right to water, 2002, UN Doc. E/C.12/2002/11, para 33. Also CESCR, General Comment 19 on the right to the
right to social security, UN Doc. E/C.12/GC/19, para 54.
218. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment 14: The right to the highest attainable standard of health, UN Doc E/C.12/2000/4,
11 August 2000; CESCR General Comment 15; Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 16 on State obligations regarding the impact of
the business sector on children’s rights, paras 43 and 44; Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, General Recomm endation
No. 28, para 36: also see: Maastricht Principles on Extraterritorial Obligations of States in the Area of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights available at:
http://www.etoconsortium.org/nc/en/main-navigation/library/maastricht-principles/?tx_drblob_pi1%5BdownloadUid%5D=23 (accessed 18 December 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

46 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
This chapter outlines the findings of an Amnesty
International and Afrewatch investigation into the
4. THE COBALT SUPPLY
global trade of cobalt that is mined in Kolwezi
(including Kasulo and Kapata). The chapter traces
CHAIN: ABSENCE OF DUE
the likely routes that this mineral takes from the
DILIGENCE FROM MINE artisanal mines in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (DRC) to the companies at the end of the
TO MARKETPLACE supply chain, which include many of the world’s
most prominent brands. It examines whether
companies in this supply chain are conducting human
rights due diligence to an international standard (see
Chapter 3 for what this should entail). The first section
“A stable supply of low-cost raw material of
of the chapter looks at the “upstream” companies in
cobalt ore is one of the key competitive
the supply chain (i.e. from the mine to the smelter).
advantages to compete in the cobalt industry”
The second section examines the “downstream
Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt Company Limited.219 companies” (i.e. from the smelter to the retailer).
Movement of cobalt from artisanal mines in the DRC to the global market
EUROPE
CHINA
U.S.A
JAPAN
3
2
2
Gamboula
3
1 SOUTH
Artisanal mine
KOREA
$ Trading centre
Smelting / refining centre
Component producer
Battery manufacturer DRC
Consumer brand $
1 Export of cobalt from DRC artisanal mines to China for processing. Over half the world's cobalt comes from the DRC, 20% of which is from artisanal mines.
2 Supply of processed cobalt to factories in Asia to make rechargeable batteries.
3 Supply of batteries to global technology and car companies.
219. Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt Co., Ltd (Huayou Cobalt), Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, May 2014, p. 66, (translated
by Amnesty International), available at http://pg.jrj.com.cn/acc/CN_DISC/BOND_NT/2014/05/28/Is00000000000009h43j.pdf (accessed 7 January
2016) (Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 47
Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers TIERS OF THE COBALT SUPPLY CHAIN
pieced together the upstream and downstream
elements of the cobalt supply chain from in-country Based on Amnesty International and Afrewatch’s
research and corroborating evidence. Starting with research in the former province of Katanga, there are
at least seven steps from the artisanal mines of the
the specific locations at which ore is mined,
DRC to the end of the supply chain.
researchers identified companies in the upstream
supply chain through interviews with government The first step in the supply chain is the point of
officials, traders and miners. Researchers tracked extraction, which involves the artisanal miners
themselves. As discussed earlier in the report, the
sacks of cobalt ore that had been mined in artisanal
adult miners then sell directly to licensed buying
mines in Kolwezi to the market where the mineral
houses. Children interviewed for this report also told
is traded. From this point, the smelted material is
researchers that they sold their minerals to adult
typically exported out of the DRC to China via a port miners or small scale traders who then took their
in South Africa. Researchers analysed corporate produce to sell to these same licensed buying houses.
In Kolwezi, the majority of these buying houses are
materials, including investor documents, annual
grouped together at the market at Musompo, on the
reports and websites, to identify what happens next,
city outskirts. These licensed trading houses then
and identified potential downstream companies. sell to a number of larger companies, which operate
Researchers wrote to each of those companies smelters and export the processed ore.220
named in this report, and have included details from
Research by Amnesty International and Afrewatch
their responses (excerpts are provided in the Annex).
found that one of the largest of these companies in
Kolwezi is Congo Dongfang Mining International
To Amnesty International and Afrewatch’s knowledge, SARL (CDM). This company is a 100 per cent owned
this is the first time a cobalt supply chain (from subsidiary of China-based Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt
Company Ltd (Huayou Cobalt), one of the world’s
mine to retailer) has been tracked in this way. The
largest manufacturers of cobalt products.221 CDM
research undertaken for this report shows that there is
is a smelter and therefore processes the ore before
very little information available that links together all of exporting it to Huayou Cobalt in China which then
the different actors and companies in the supply chain. processes it further.222
Flow chart of the cobalt supply chain
$ $
Intermediaries Licensed buying Lithium-ion Lithium-ion
Congo Dongfang Huayou Cobalt, Electronics and
Artisanal mines (in the case of houses in Musompo battery component battery
Mining China car companies
child miners) and Kapata manufacturers manufacturers
220. The company which smelts the cobalt is in a key position in the supply chain (often referred to as the “choke point”). As the point at which minerals
are processed before being incorporated into components and other products, it is generally seen as the best point at which a company can track the
mineral and the conditions of its extraction and trading from the mine site through to local suppliers (i.e. occurrence of human rights abuses linked to
the extraction and movement). As discussed in Chapter 3, the smelter itself should be able to demonstrate that it has sourced the mineral responsi-
bly including by taking steps to identify and address human rights abuses within that part of the chain. This information should be made available to
downstream companies in its supply chain.
221. Huayou Cobalt, Annual Report 2014, p. 20, (translated by Amnesty International), available at http://www.huayou.com/downloadRepository/eda46c8c-
448c-40df-8efa-a24bcfb76446.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016).
222. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 66.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

48 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Buying houses at the Musompo market on the outskirts of Kolwezi, where artisanal miners sell the cobalt and copper they have mined in the artisanal
mines surrounding the city, May 2015. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
According to Huayou Cobalt corporate documents, city. The DRC government established the market in
which list the company’s main customers, a significant 2013, relocating copper and cobalt buying houses
amount of the cobalt products it sells are used in the (maisons d’achat or comptoirs) from built up areas
manufacture of rechargeable lithium-ion (Li-on)
within the city, to ease congestion and pollution
batteries, which power electronic devices such as
levels.224 These buying houses are licensed to trade
mobile phones, laptops and cameras, as well as
in cobalt. Today, there are more than 200 of them
electric vehicles.223 According to its corporate
located there, mostly owned by Chinese individuals,
documents, Huayou Cobalt sells to battery component
according to a government official.225 In addition to
manufacturers in China and South Korea. In turn,
those at Musompo market, there are also such trading
these companies sell to battery manufacturers,
houses located close to individual mine sites.226
which then sell on to well-known consumer brands.
There is a constant stream of motorcycles, minibuses,
I. UPSTREAM
cars and trucks taking sacks of cobalt ore from the
artisanal mines of Kolwezi to the Musompo market.
FROM MINES TO TRADERS
Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers
followed vehicles from the mining area of Kasulo to
Researchers observed that most of the cobalt the market. Researchers witnessed licensed buying
extracted from the artisanal mines in Kolwezi is houses purchasing minerals directly from the artisanal
traded at the Musompo market, 15 kms from the miners.
223. Huayou Cobalt, Annual Report 2014, p. 12; and Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 67.
224. Le Potential, Kolwezi : Les Entrepots De Minerais Deplaces Loin Des Habitations, 6 August 2013, available at http://www.lepotentielonline.com/index.
php?option=com_content&view=article&id=1810:kolwezi-les-entrepots-de-minerais-deplaces-loin-des-habitations (accessed 7 January 2016).
225. Amnesty International interview with SAESSCAM, Kolwezi, 11 May 2015.
226. Researchers observed these in Kapata and Kambove.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 49
A car weighed down by sacks of mineral ore on its way to the market at Musompo. There is a constant stream of motorcycles, minibuses, cars and trucks
taking sacks of cobalt ore from the artisanal mines of Kolwezi to the Musompo market, May 2015. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch
A miner on a motorbike transports sacks of mineral ore to the Musompo market on the outskirts of Kolwezi, May 2015. © Amnesty International and
Afrewatch
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

50 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
In carrying out the investigation, Amnesty International Miners at Kasulo told researchers that they sold to
and Afrewatch researchers observed activities in different buying houses in Musompo market depending
four buying houses – three in Musompo and one in on which gave them a “good price.”234 Children who
Kapata. In the three buying houses in Musompo, the had collected rocks in Musonoie and other industrial
researchers interviewed staff with the permission of mining concessions said that they did not sell di-
the Chinese owners.227 In each buying house, individual rectly to licensed buying houses in Musompo market
miners queued to sell sacks of ore containing cobalt. or elsewhere, but to small-scale traders at the mine
Staff weighed the sacks and tested the ore’s grade sites where they worked. In determining the price
to establish a price.228 In two of the buying houses, that the children would receive for the cobalt ore,
staff recorded the names of the sellers, the area these small scale traders did not test or weigh the
where they said the minerals had come from, as well
ore but gave them a price based on their estimation
as the weight and value of the ore. As explained in
of quality and weight.235
Chapter 3, buying houses are required to buy from
licensed artisanal miners, but are not obliged by law
to ask any other questions such as the exact location
CONGO DONGFANG MINING INTERNATIONAL (CDM)
of where the mineral was mined nor about the
conditions of extraction, such as whether children
were involved.229 In one of the buying houses, the Multiple sources identified Congo Dongfang
foreman said that they did not even record the place International Mining SARL (CDM), as the largest
where the cobalt had been mined.230 single buyer of cobalt that originates in the artisanal
mines in and around Kolwezi. According to a Ministry
Staff at the three Musompo buying houses visited of Mines official in Kolwezi, “CDM is the giant.”236 A
by researchers said that they bought minerals from Chinese businessman managing one of the Musompo
all the different sites in and around the city of
buying houses said that CDM was so big, “it is like
Kolwezi.231 In one buying house, miners queuing to
America.”237 A CDM employee at its warehouse close
sell their goods told researchers they had come from
to Musompo market said that the company sends
Kasulo and Musonoie.232 These are two areas where
three to four trucks a day of cobalt and copper ore
researchers had documented child labour and
from Kolwezi to Lubumbashi where the company is
hazardous working conditions.233 Similarly, researchers
headquartered and has a smelting operation.238 The
observed that staff at the buying house at Kapata,
Ministry of Mines official also said that on an average
located outside of Musompo market but near the
day, a total of up to 15 trucks carrying up to 25
mining sites, could not have failed to see that the
minerals they were buying had been handled by tonnes of cobalt or copper for many different firms,
children, given that the lake in which the children makes that journey.239 Based on these figures from
carry out activities related to artisanal mining is CDM and the Ministry of Mines, at least one in five of
directly in front of the buying house. the trucks carrying ore from Musompo is owned by CDM.
227. Amnesty International interviews, Musompo, 14 May 2015.
228. All of the miners and petty traders that Amnesty International and Afrewatch researchers interviewed complained that the buying houses in Musompo
and elsewhere regularly cheated them out of a fair price for their goods. They complained that the buying houses dictated the value of the ore, after
weighing it and testing its grade (using a machine called a Metorex). The miners and traders all complained that they had no way of challenging the
buying houses’ results because they could not test for themselves the grade or value of the ore. Amnesty International is unable to verify these com-
plaints. The Chinese owner of one buying house in Musompo denied he tricked the miners, explaining that the quality of the ore coming from Kasulo
had dropped markedly since mining had started there in the summer of 2014. Amnesty International interview, Musompo, 14 May 2015.
229. DRC Mining Code (2002), Articles 116 and 117.
230. Amnesty International interviews, Musompo, 14 May 2015.
231. Amnesty International interviews, Musompo, 14 May 2015.
232. Amnesty International interviews, Musompo, 14 May 2015.
233. As mentioned earlier in this report, Kasulo is the residential neighbourhood of Kolwezi where cobalt has been mined through illegal hand-dug tunnels
since 2014 and where researchers observed children working. Musonoie is an industrial mining concession, which artisanal miners, including children,
illegally enter to gather rocks containing copper and cobalt.
234. Amnesty International interviews, Kolwezi, 11-13 May 2015.
235. Amnesty International interviews, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
236. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 12 May 2015.
237. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 13 May 2015.
238. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 12 May 2015.
239. Amnesty International interview, Kolwezi, 12 May 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 51
On 14 May 2015, researchers saw one of CDM’s trucks being loaded
A signboard outside CDM’s warehouse, which is on the road between
with sacks of ore at the market in Musompo. Researchers then followed
Kolwezi and Musompo market, advertises in French that it “buys copper
the truck from Musompo market back to the company’s warehouse,
and cobalt products at a good price”, May 2015. © Amnesty
which is only 5kms from the market, May 2015. © Amnesty
International and Afrewatch
International and Afrewatch
Staff in all of the four buying houses that Amnesty products at a good price.” The fact that the sign is
International and Afrewatch researchers visited said in French suggests that it is advertising to Congolese
that CDM was one of their clients. CDM operates a miners or small-scale traders who are Congolese and
number of distinctively-coloured orange trucks and speak French, rather than to the owners of the licensed
researchers saw these trucks being loaded with sacks
buying houses who are Chinese. Some of the Chinese
of ore at the market in Musompo. On 14 May 2015,
business people interviewed for this report did not
researchers followed one of CDM’s trucks from
speak French. In a letter to Amnesty International,
Musompo market back to its warehouse, which is
CDM’s parent company (Huayou Cobalt) denied that
only 5kms from the market. A security guard at
this signboard existed.242
CDM’s warehouse told the researchers that the sacks
contained cobalt and confirmed that the truck had
According to investor documents publicly released
come from Musompo market.240 When researchers
by Huayou Cobalt, CDM buys from “local mining
asked to speak to the manager of the warehouse, the
companies or brokers in DR Congo or through its own
office secretary said that he was not available as he
procurement network.”243 The document explains
was in Musompo buying minerals.241
that CDM pays for the cobalt with cash.244 It then
A signboard outside CDM’s warehouse, which is on carries the cobalt on trucks to Lubumbashi where, as
the road between Kolwezi and Musompo market, previously stated, CDM is headquartered and has a
advertises in French that it “buys copper and cobalt smelting operation.
240. Amnesty International interview, Musompo, 14 May 2015.
241. Amnesty International interview, Musompo, 14 May 2015.
242. Letter dated 21 August 2015 (see Annex).
243. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 66.
244. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 69.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

52 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Once the processed cobalt arrives in China, Huayou
FROM CONGO TO CHINA – HUAYOU COBALT
Cobalt processes it further, turning it into a range of
different chemical products.247 The company claims
In Lubumbashi, CDM processes the low-grade cobalt
to be China’s largest manufacturer of cobalt products,
into crude cobalt hydroxide before shipping it, via
and the third largest in the world.248
Durban in South Africa, to Zheijiang province on the
eastern seaboard of China, where its parent company
Huayou Cobalt is a publicly traded company, listed on
Huayou Cobalt is based.245 CDM is a wholly and
the Shanghai Stock Exchange. In 2013, it sold cobalt
directly owned subsidiary of Huayou Cobalt. Huayou
Cobalt also operates several industrial mines in worth almost 1.5 billion yuan (US$235 million),249
the DRC. In the three years up to 2014, company making a profit of almost 200 million yuan (US$32
documents show that CDM provided Huayou Cobalt million).250
with more than 40 per cent of the company’s total
production of cobalt.246
HUAYOU COBALT’S LINKS TO THE CHINESE AND DRC
GOVERNMENTS
Huayou Cobalt, is a publicly traded company, but it has several ties to the Chinese government:
Though ownership of Huayou Cobalt remains primarily in private hands, around 24 per cent of the company is held
by state-owned entities.251 Huayou Cobalt’s third largest shareholder, holding 10 per cent, is the China-Africa
Development Fund.252 This is a government fund that supports Chinese companies in Africa.253
The Chinese government has given the company millions of dollars in subsidies, and the state-owned China Export &
Credit Insurance Corporation insures it.254
Huayou Cobalt is a minority shareholder in the strategically important Sicomines joint venture between the Congolese
state-owned mining company Gécamines and a consortium of Chinese companies. The main shareholders are China
Railway Group Limited and Sinohydro Corp, both state-owned companies. Huayou Cobalt bought a 5 per cent share
in the joint venture in 2008.255 Huayou Cobalt also has, through its wholly-owned subsidiary, CDM, links to the DRC
government. CDM has made several payments to the Congolese government through its “public interest activities.”
These payments were detailed in a letter sent to Amnesty International.256 As well as financing various infrastructure
and charitable projects in Katanga, CDM donated US$20,000 to the election campaign of President Joseph Kabila
in 2011.
245. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 70.
246. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 70.
247. See Huayou Cobalt, Product List, available at http://en.huayou.com/products_list.html
248. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 70.
249. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 14.
250. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 57.
251. Huayou Cobalt, 2014 Annual Report, p. 43.
252. Huayou Cobalt, 2014 Annual Report, p. 43.
253. The China-Africa Development Fund, Homepage, available at http://www.cadfund.com/en/NewsInfo.aspx?NId=48 (accessed 26 November 2015)
254. These were worth 14,470,100 yuan (approx. US$2.3m) in 2011, 12,458,400 yuan (US$1.9m) in 2012 and 6,689,100 yuan (US$1m) in 2013,
Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 16.
255. Sicomines Joint Venture Agreement, 22 April 2008, available at http://mines-rdc.cd/fr/documents/convention_jv_gcm_cec_avenants.pdf (accessed 26
November 2015).
256. Letter dated 21 August 2015 (see Annex).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 53
identifies occurring at any point in its supply chain
(for example, at the point of extraction).
Huayou Cobalt has been purchasing cobalt in southern
DRC since 2006. It runs a large, well-staffed
operation in the country, with offices in at least
three cities (Lubumbashi, Likasi and Kolwezi). The
dangerous conditions and frequent accidents in the
artisanal mines, the presence of tens of thousands of
child miners, and the DRC government’s poor regulation
of artisanal mining have all been well documented in
CDM’s headquarters in Lubumbashi, where the company has a smelting
operation. Ore bought from buying houses is brought here, where CDM recent years by the international and Congolese media,
processes the low-grade cobalt into crude cobalt hydroxide before shipping NGOs, governments and international bodies, as
it, via Durban in South Africa, to Zheijiang province on the eastern
seaboard of China, May 2015. © Amnesty International and Afrewatch detailed in Chapter 2. The company has itself been
the subject of criticism – in 2008, Bloomberg News
published a story alleging that Huayou Cobalt bought
cobalt that had been mined by children.257
CDM / HUAYOU COBALT’S FAILURE TO
CONDUCT DUE DILIGENCE
Given the considerable attention focusing on these
issues, the company must be aware of the poor working
Given that both CDM and Huayou Cobalt act as a
conditions in the cobalt artisanal mines and the
smelter in the cobalt supply chain researched in
issue of children working in the mining areas. It is
this report and that CDM is 100 per cent owned and certainly aware that cobalt is a substance that needs
managed by Huayou Cobalt, the two companies are to be handled carefully, as researchers observed that
treated as one (Huayou Cobalt) for the purposes of CDM issues its own staff in the DRC with protective
the analysis below. equipment, such as facemasks, boots, gloves and
helmets.258
As part of its responsibility to undertake human
rights due diligence to an international standard, In July 2015, Amnesty International wrote to Huayou
Huayou Cobalt is expected to understand exactly Cobalt to ask the following questions:
how the cobalt that it buys is extracted, handled,
transported and traded (see Chapter 3). It should be 1. What supply chain due diligence policies and
able to identify where it is mined, by whom and under processes does Huayou Cobalt have in place to
what conditions (including whether human rights ensure that CDM’s sourcing of cobalt from the
abuses or any form of illegality are taking place). The DRC does not involve human rights violations,
company should have a system in place to be able including the worst forms of child labour?
to identify the chain of custody or trace the supply
chain up to the mine site. This includes capturing 2. What measures does Huayou Cobalt take if it
the movement of the minerals, such as transportation becomes aware of human rights abuses taking
routes. The company should check and assess if place in connection with its suppliers?
the buying houses and other upstream actors are
conducting their own due diligence. As the smelter, 3. What steps has Huayou Cobalt taken to investigate
Huayou Cobalt should also obtain third party audits the claims made in the 2008 Bloomberg report
of its due diligence efforts and make the results of regarding CDM’s purchasing of cobalt mined by
these audits publicly available. It should also take children in artisanal mines in the DRC, and what
steps to address any human rights abuses that it was the outcome of this investigation? Were any
257. Simon Clark, Michael Smith, Franz Wild, China Lets Child Workers Die Digging in Congo Mines for Copper, Bloomberg News, 22 July, 2008, http://
www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aW8xVLQ4Xhr8 (accessed 18 July 2015).
258. Photo on file with Amnesty International.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

54 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
changes made to CDM or Huayou Cobalt policies taking steps to address the human rights abuses
and processes? they identify as occurring – it is not enough for the
company to put in place a code of conduct and then
4. What kind of information does Huayou Cobalt say it is “reasonably presumed” that their suppliers
publicly report on the risks of labour and human comply with local laws and social responsibilities.
rights abuses linked to its operations and on From what Amnesty International and Afrewatch
preventative or other measures that it is taking in researchers saw in four buying houses, Huayou
response? undertakes no such checks and is taking no other
action to address conditions at the mines – which it
5. What is the volume and value of the cobalt that CDM must be aware of for the reasons above. In its letter,
buys from artisanal miners in the DRC each year? there is no indication that it traces the cobalt supply
chain to the mining areas itself. Huayou Cobalt also
In response, Huayou Cobalt explained that following does not mention inspecting or addressing conditions
the Bloomberg News report it had decided to stop in the unauthorized artisanal mining zones, such as
buying directly from miners, and instead only Kasulo, even though its suppliers are buying cobalt
purchased cobalt from licensed traders (for full reply that has been mined there.
see Annex).259 It stated that it had “rigorously selected”
these suppliers, and has “reasonably presumed that In summary, Huayou Cobalt is failing to respect
the behaviours of suppliers comply with relevant international human rights as required by the UN
regulations of the DRC and taken the corresponding Guiding Principles and it is not implementing the
social responsibilities.” The company advised that it five-step framework recommended in the OECD
has developed a code of conduct for these suppliers. Guidance, despite the fact that the OECD Guidance
Among other things, this obliges them to ensure that has been recognised by the Chinese Chamber of
no children were employed “in the process of provision Commerce of Metals Minerals & Chemicals Importers
of goods or services to our company.”260 & Exporters as the “recognised international framework”
to conduct mineral supply chain due diligence.261
For all the reasons stated above, there is a high risk
Huayou Cobalt also wrote that it visits its suppliers
that Huayou Cobalt is buying (and subsequently
“from time to time” to examine employment
selling) cobalt from artisanal mines in which children
conditions, and when staff visited two mines in
are engaged in hazardous labour, one of the worst
2014 they did not find any children. Finally, the
forms of child labour, and where adult workers work
company claimed that “some local residents of the
in unsafe and hazardous conditions.
DRC” fraudulently used its name to purchase minerals,
damaging its reputation.
However, the company does not explain how it II. DOWNSTREAM
selects its suppliers nor if it traces all actors in the
supply chain up to the mining areas. The company
This section examines the companies at the
did not provide any details of whether it tries to
downstream end of the supply chain. These begin
ensure that its upstream suppliers conduct meaningful
with companies that are supplied with processed
checks to identify the precise source of the minerals
ore by Huayou Cobalt, and finish with well-known
that they buy (e.g. where they come from and who
was involved in the extraction) or the conditions consumer brands that sell products containing
under which they are mined. Under international cobalt. As previously discussed in Chapter 3, each
standards on supply chain due diligence, Huayou of these downstream firms has a responsibility to
Cobalt should be undertaking these checks and undertake supply chain due diligence on their cobalt
259. Letter dated 21 August 2015.
260. Huayou Cobalt, Code of Conduct for Suppliers, (see Annex).
261. See Chapter 3.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 55
supply chain, including by tracing the cobalt that they under which the minerals were traded and extracted.
buy (directly or within components or products) back Downstream companies should also be responding
to the smelter, which in this case is Huayou Cobalt.
to any human rights risks they identify with respect
to their smelter. Amnesty International wrote to each
As part of that supply chain due diligence, each of
of the companies named in this section, and their
these downstream companies should be checking
replies are summarised below and provided in greater
that Huayou Cobalt is carrying out practices to
confirm the chain of custody and the conditions detail in the Annex.
POTENTIAL DRC COBALT SUPPLY CHAIN According to publicly available information
Smelter/refiner
Battery component manufacturers
CDM / Huayou Cobalt
Battery manufacturer
Electronic goods and vehicle
manufacturers
* Indicates companies
which deny a connection
Toda Hunan
to this potential supply Tianjin Bamo
Shanshan New L&F Material
chain and/or to DRC cobalt. Technology*
Material
Ningbo Shanshan
(parent company
of Toda
Shanshan)
Samsung Tianjin Samsung
BAK Coslight* LG Chem
SDI* Lishen* SDI*
ATL
Apple Samsung* B L Y G D VW* A D p e p l l l e BYD H A u h a o w n e g i* Sa A m p s p u l n e g* Ap L p G le
Mercedes HP* OKWAP
Huawei* (Inventec)*
(Daimler)*
Lenovo ZTE
Sony*
(Motorola)
Microsoft
Samsung*
Vodafone*
VW*
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

56 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
HUAYOU COBALT’S BATTERY Cobalt’s sales, worth 192,001,500 yuan
(US$31 million), in 2013.268
COMPONENT MANUFACTURER
• Tianjin Bamo Science and Technology Co.,
CLIENTS AND THEIR SUPPLY Ltd (Tianjin Bamo), a Chinese battery material
supplier, which accounted for 13.13 per cent of
CHAINS
sales, worth 191,489,400 yuan (US$31 million),
according to Huayou Cobalt.269
Huayou Cobalt boasts of having “sales networks
Amnesty International wrote to each of these
covering the domestic market as well as major
companies and asked them to confirm if they
international markets including Japan, South Korea,
purchase cobalt from Huayou Cobalt.270
Europe and the USA.”262 It also reported in its 2014
annual report, as well as on its website, that certain
- Ningbo Shanshan did not reply to Amnesty
of its advanced cobalt products were undergoing
International’s letter.
evaluation and certification by Samsung SDI and
- L & F did not reply directly to Amnesty International’s
LG Chem, two of the world’s largest battery
letter, but advised one of its clients, LG Chem, that
manufacturers.263
the company had purchased cobalt oxide from Huayou
Cobalt.271
Huayou Cobalt named its three most important
- Tianjin Bamo replied via two of its clients to deny
customers in a 2014 bond prospectus as well as its
purchasing from Huayou Cobalt. It wrote that it has
2014 annual report.264 These were lithium-ion battery
“no business dealings” with the company.272 This
component manufacturers in China and South Korea
is despite Huayou Cobalt stating that Tianjin Bamo
including:265
was one of its largest customers of cobalt products
in 2011, 2013 and 2014.273 Tianjin Bamo provided
• Toda Hunan Shanshan New Material, a
no explanation for this disparity, nor any explanation
subsidiary of Ningbo Shanshan Co Ltd (Ningbo as to why Huayou Cobalt would want to include false
Shanshan) which was Huayou Cobalt’s largest information in its investor documents.
customer of its cobalt products, accounting
for 13.54 per cent of cobalt sales, worth Considering these responses collectively (one non-
197,432,900 yuan (US$32 million) in 2013.266 response, one confirmation and one assertion which
In its 2014 annual report, Ningbo Shanshan lacks credibility) and the fact that they are listed in
said it was China’s largest lithium-ion battery Huayou Cobalt’s corporate filings, Amnesty International
materials supplier.267 concludes that all three are likely customers of
• L&F Material Co. (L&F), a South Korean firm, Huayou Cobalt and therefore part of the same cobalt
which accounted for 13.16 per cent of Huayou supply chain.
262. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 70.
263. Huayou Cobalt, Annual Report 2014, p. 19; and “The Company’s technology and research and development situation,” available at http://www.
huayou.com/science/&FrontComContent_list01-1342677884477ContId=37&comContentId=37&comp_stats=comp-FrontComContent_list01-
1342677884477.html (accessed 24 November 2015).
264. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 6; and Annual Report 2014, p. 12.
265. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 68.
266. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 68; and Annual Report, 2014, p. 12.
267. Ningbo Shanshan, Annual Report, 2014, p. 18, available at http://www.ssgf.net/pdf/600884_2014_n.pdf, (accessed 26 June 2015) (Ningbo Shanshan
Co. Ltd., Annual Report 2014).
268. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 68; and Annual Report, 2014, p. 12.
269. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 68; and Annual Report, 2014, p. 12.
270. The letters also asked each company the following: 1. “What are the policies and practices that your company has in place to identify and prevent human
rights abuses in your supply chains, particularly in relation to child labour (e.g. including specific guarantees that you seek from suppliers, checks,
etc.)?” 2. “In the event that your company has detected human rights abuses in your cobalt supply chains in the past, particularly those involving
child labour, what steps have you taken to address these?” 3. “What steps has your company taken to publicly disclose its human rights due diligence
policies and practices (e.g. annual filings, posted on the website)?”
271. Letter from LG Chem, 13 November 2015 (see Annex).
272. Email from Tianjin Lishen Battery Co., Ltd., 4 November 2015, and Harbin Coslight Power Co., Ltd., 6 November 2015.
273. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 68; and Annual Report, 2014, p. 12.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 57
These three companies (Ningbo Shanshan, L&F and has traced potential actors at every stage of the
Tianjin Bamo) sell their cobalt-containing battery process and written to each of these companies asking
components to battery manufacturers. These them: to confirm if their products contain DRC cobalt,
companies list the names of the battery manufacturers if they sourced from Huayou Cobalt and/or one of the
on their websites or in investor documents. The battery manufacturers publicly identified to be one
battery manufacturers, which are the next step in the of their suppliers, and to provide information on any
chain, also list the names of their customers on their human rights supply chain due diligence practices
websites and, where available, in investor documents. they carry out in relation to cobalt. Details of these
Based on this information, Amnesty International replies are provided in the Annex.
NINGBO SHANSHAN’S
POTENTIAL SHANSHAN COBALT SUPPLY CHAIN
According to publicly available information
POTENTIAL CUSTOMER
NETWORK
Battery component Toda Hunan
manufacturers Shanshan
In its 2014 annual report, Ningbo Shanshan
New Material
Battery manufacturer named the following customers:274
Electronic goods and
vehicle manufacturers “After many years of accumulation,
the company has a stable and
* Indicates companies
Ningbo Shanshan
which deny a connection excellent customer base, including
(parent company
to this potential supply of Toda Hunan globally renowned enterprises such
chain and/or to DRC cobalt. Shanshan)
as SDI, SONY, BYD, ATL, LISHEN
and BAK, and has entered to
become the supply chain of world
famous companies such as Apple
and BENZ.”
Samsung Tianjin Ningbo Shanshan also stated on its
BAK
SDI* Lishen*
website that it works in “a strategic
cooperation with Samsung, LG, Sony and
other famous international enterprises.”275
However, no further details are provided
by the company as to what this means.
ATL
Apple
Apple Samsung* BYD VW*
Dell Samsung SDI, a South Korean battery
LG
HP*
( M Da e i r m ce l d er e ) s * Huawei* manufacturer, is a member of the
Sony* Lenovo Samsung group of companies.276 It
(Motorola)
Microsoft has many clients, including Apple Inc.
Samsung*
(Apple), which named Samsung SDI in
Vodafone*
VW* its list of top suppliers in 2014.277 BYD
Company Ltd. (BYD) is a leading Chinese
274. Ningbo Shanshan Co. Ltd., Annual Report 2014, p. 19.
275. Ningbo Shanshan Co. Ltd, About Us, available at http://www.ssgf.net/aboutus.asp, (accessed 26 June 2015).
276. See Samsung SDI homepage, available at http://www.samsungsdi.com/gateway, (accessed 26 June 2015).
277. Apple Inc., Supplier List 2015, available at https://www.apple.com/euro/supplier-responsibility/b/generic/pdf/Apple_Supplier_List_2015.pdf (accessed
23 July 2015) (Apple Inc., Supplier List 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

58 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
manufacturer of electric vehicles which states on its tungsten, and gold – the “3T and gold”), but not
website that it has clients around the world, including cobalt.284 The company therefore concludes that
the USA, Canada, Brazil, India and the UK.27 it does not know where the cobalt in its products
Amperex Technology Limited (ATL) is a Hong Kong comes from:
battery manufacturer.279 China BAK Battery, Inc.
(BAK) is a battery manufacturer, which states on its “In reality, it is very hard to trace the
website that it supplied companies including the source of the mineral due to the suppliers’
German car maker, Volkswagen (VW).280 nondisclosure of information and the
complexity of the supply chains. Therefore
Another Chinese battery manufacturer Tianjin Lishen it is impossible for us to determine whether
Battery Joint-Stock Co., Ltd. (Tianjin Lishen) states the cobalt supplied to Samsung SDI comes
on its website that its customers include Apple, from DRC Katanga’s mines.”
Samsung, Motorola (which is owned by Lenovo), Dell,
Hewlett-Packard Company (now known as HP Inc.), Sony wrote a brief reply to Amnesty International.285
Microsoft Corporation (Microsoft), Vodafone, VW It did not confirm or deny whether it sources
“and domestic industry leaders, such as Huawei.”281 components from Ningbo Shanshan. It wrote that:
Tianjin Lishen is also on Apple’s list of top suppliers.282
“We take this issue seriously and have been
conducting a fact-finding process. So far,
ANALYSIS OF COMPANY RESPONSES
we could not find obvious results that our
products contain the cobalt originated from
As stated above, Ningbo Shanshan listed the following Katanga in the DRC.”
as direct buyers of its battery components: Samsung
SDI, Sony, ATL, BYD, Mercedes Benz (which is It provides no detail of what this “fact-finding
owned by Daimler AG (Daimler)), Tianjin Lishen and process” consisted of, for example whether Sony
BAK. traced the cobalt in its products back to the smelter,
as required by prevailing international standards.
Samsung SDI stated that it does not do direct It also did not provide any evidence that Sony has
business with CDM or Huayou Cobalt and that asked their smelters if they have sourced the cobalt
neither of the two companies are in Samsung SDI’s responsibly i.e. identified and addressed human
supply chain. It also stated that it does not have a rights risks, such as child labour. On its website,
business relationship with Ningbo Shanshan.283 Sony details its due diligence policy for the 3T and
However, Samsung SDI does accept that it is gold, but does not state that it conducts similar due
supplied by another company identified by researchers, diligence for other minerals such as cobalt.286 This
L&F (see below). Samsung SDI further states that suggests that the company does not in fact have in
it is carrying out supply chain due diligence for place a process (that meets international standards)
the four so-called conflict minerals (tantalum, tin, for tracing the cobalt in its products.
278. BYD homepage available at http://www.byd.cn/BYDEnglish/groupnews/index.jsp?pageNumber=1, (accessed 26 June 2015).
279. ATL homepage available at http://www.atlbattery.com/about/en/about-1.htm, (accessed 26 June 2015).
280. BAK, China BAK to Supply Lithium-ion Batteries to FAW-Volkswagen Automotive Co., Ltd., 23 August 2012, available at http://www.bak.com.cn/news_
detail.aspx?NewsCateID=21&CateID=21&NewsID=790 (accessed 20 December 2015).
281. Tianjin Lishen, Company Profile, available at http://en.lishen.com.cn/ (accessed 29 June 2015).
282. Apple Inc., Supplier List 2015.
283. Letter from Samsung SDI, 23 November 2015 (see Annex).
284. See Chapter 3.
285. Email from Sony, 30 October 2015 (see Annex).
286. Sony, Responsible Sourcing of Raw Materials, available at http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/csr_report/sourcing/materials/ (accessed 26 November 2015).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 59
Daimler states that, “concerning the particular case products containing cobalt that has been processed
at hand we can confirm that we neither source from by Huayou Cobalt.290 Instead, addressing the broader
the DRC or the mentioned companies directly.”287 question about its due diligence policy, Apple wrote
Daimler states that it does not “engage in any traceable that it was:
mineral or commodity purchasing activities in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.” However the company “Currently evaluating dozens of different
then goes on to state that: materials, including cobalt, in order to identify
labor and environmental risks as well as
“Due to the high complexity of automotive opportunities for Apple to bring about effective,
supply chains, we are, however, not able to scalable and sustainable change.”
definitely confirm whether or not cobalt in
our products originates from this region or Apple did not explain why it has not put in place due
from the mentioned companies at any stage diligence measures for cobalt until now, particularly
within our supply chains.” since human rights risks associated with its extraction
in the DRC are well documented. For example, the
Regarding its policy towards mineral supply chains, US government has issued warnings relating to child
Daimler writes that it regularly reviews its suppliers, labour linked to the extraction of cobalt in the DRC
in order to “identify possible sustainability risks since 2009.292
in our supply chain with regard to child labour,
environmental protection, corruption prevention, HP Inc. (HP, formerly Hewlett-Packard Company)
violation of freedom of association or violations of replied that it is “conducting an investigation” with
human rights.”288 However, Daimler provides no its cobalt suppliers.293 It wrote that:
mention of conducting due diligence on its mineral
supply chain to the standard established by the OECD. “As of now we have not found any linkage
between our products and the DRC mine.
Tianjin Lishen replied via one of its downstream If a linkage is found, we will take steps to
customers, Huawei.289 Tianjin Lishen advised that address the risks you have raised.”
“the cathode materials supplied to us by Toda Hunan
Shanshan New Material Co., Ltd [subsidiary of Ningbo] HP did not explain what this investigation consists
hasn’t used raw materials from Huayou Cobalt.” of, or whether it had traced the cobalt in its
However, it did not explain how it was able to confirm components or products to the smelter, as required
that this was the case. Huayou Cobalt publicly by the OECD Guidance. HP refers to its Supply Chain
named Toda Hunan Shanshan New Material Co., Ltd Social and Environmental Responsibility Policy and
as its largest customer of cobalt products in 2013.290 states that this is consistent with the UNGPs. It also
states that its supplier code of conduct prohibits child
Companies identified to be further down Ningbo labour and that this is communicated to suppliers.
Shanshan’s supply chain: However, specific details as to how abuses of the
rights to children or other human rights abuses will
Apple did not directly answer Amnesty International’s be remediated (e.g. at the point of extraction) are
questions regarding its purchasing of components or not provided.
287. Letter from Daimler, 29 October 2015 (see Annex).
288. Daimler, Sustainability Report 2014, p. 65 (provided to Amnesty International by Daimler).
289. Email from Tianjin Lishen, 4 November 2015 (see Annex).
290. Huayou Cobalt, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 68; and Annual Report, 2014, p. 12.
291. Email from Apple, 5 December 2015 (see Annex).
292. US Department of Labor, List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor.
293. Email from HP, 17 December 2015.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

60 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Microsoft confirmed that Tianjin Lishen was a supplier, Guidance advises downstream companies that
but only on a small scale.294 find it hard to identify upstream suppliers to work
with other industry members in order to do so.295
“We currently contract with this supplier Furthermore, as a global brand, with a net annual
[Tianjin Lishen] to provide a very limited income of over US$12 billion, Microsoft would likely
number of batteries for a product have incredible leverage in terms of working with
development project. To our knowledge, Lishen to improve its supply chain practices, specifically
Lishen batteries are not used in any to seek to address serious human rights abuses in
product currently sold by Microsoft. Due to the chain.296
the small volumes used, Tianjin Lishen is
not listed as a Microsoft Top 100 Hardware Lenovo, the parent company of Motorola, states that
Supplier List… We took immediate action by it is not a direct buyer of Tianjin Lishen and that
asking Tianjin Lishen to remove this reference Huayou Cobalt and CDM have not “otherwise been
[on their website] to Microsoft as it is a identified as cobalt processers in Lenovo’s or Motorola’s
misuse of the Microsoft name and implies supply chain.”297 However, the company advises
incorrectly that we have a major contractual that Tianjin Lishen supplies batteries to two of its
relationship. Lishen has complied with “third party trademark licensees” that sell under the
Microsoft’s request.” Motorola brand.
Regarding its wider policy for tracing the source of Lenovo wrote that it will:
minerals in the components and products that
Microsoft purchases, the company conceded that it “Work with Tianjin Lishen and our trademark
did not follow the OECD’s guidance on this. licensees to investigate the concerns raised
Microsoft wrote that: in your letter. If we verify that these concerns
are valid, Lenovo will instruct our licensees
“we have not traced the cobalt used in to discontinue their use of Tianjin Lishen
Microsoft products through our supply chain unless or until Tianjin Lishen can demonstrate
to the smelter level due to the complexity compliance to Lenovo’s requirements. Our
and resources required.” agreements with our trademark licensees
require them to abide by our supplier Code
Amnesty International does not consider this to be a of Conduct which prohibits them from using
convincing argument for not doing the required due suppliers that utilize child labour.”
diligence for DRC cobalt, particularly given the
significant size and resources of the company, as Lenovo does not state if it knew of any specific risks
well as its potential leverage over its suppliers. relating to child labour arising from Tianjin Lishen’s
supply chain prior to being contacted by Amnesty
Furthermore, Microsoft’s representation that Tianjin International. While being able to track Tianjin Lishen
Lishen is not one of Microsoft’s Top 100 Hardware within its supply chain, Lenovo does not provide
Suppliers is irrelevant. Current international standards details as to how the company ensures that their
relating to supply chain due diligence are not trademark licensees follow the provisions of its code
restricted to only carrying out supply chain due of conduct. Lenovo also does not state whether it has
diligence on a company’s major suppliers. The OECD tracked the mineral back to the smelter, in accordance
294. Letter from Microsoft, 29 October 2015 (see Annex).
295. OECD Guidance, p. 42.
296. Microsoft, Facts about Microsoft, available at http://news.microsoft.com/facts-about-microsoft/ (accessed 26 November 2015).
297. Letter from Lenovo, 10 November 2015 (see Annex).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 61
with international standards (see Chapter 3). Lenovo Lishen, which denied being supplied cobalt in the
states that it participates in industry efforts for due way that Amnesty International had described:
diligence on 3T and gold from the DRC, but not on
other minerals. “The supply chain you mapped out in your
letter was refused by our supplier. To our
Vodafone Group Plc (Vodafone) responded to Amnesty best knowledge, the Cobalt in our batteries
International and advised that it had checked its does not originate from the DRC.”
supplier systems and found that Tianjin Lishen was
not a direct supplier, and that it does not use Chinese In its response, VW provided no indication that other
battery manufacturers.298 steps were taken to verify Tianjin Lishen’s denials.
Nor did it refer to other efforts made to trace the
However it also stated that: cobalt supply chain up to smelters and go beyond
Tianjin Lishen as required by international standards.
“Both the smelters and mines from which
the metals such as cobalt are originally
VW added that its “internal system for sustainable
sourced are several steps away from Vodafone
supply chain management” had not identified human
in the supply chain. For this reason, we are
rights abuses in cobalt supply chains. Company due
unaware as to whether or not cobalt in our
diligence measures are referred to, but specific
products originates in Katanga in DRC or
details are not provided as to the steps taken to
whether CDM and Huayou Cobalt process
assess, identify and address human rights risks
cobalt within our supply chains.”
arising in relation to cobalt. Therefore, it is difficult
to ascertain how VW has reached this conclusion.
Vodafone’s response shows that it is not attempting
to trace their cobalt suppliers up to the point of their
In its letter, VW also refers to its conflict minerals
smelters, which falls short of what is required under
policy which primarily relates to the mining of 3T
the international standard. The company draws a
and gold and their risk in financing conflict. Cobalt is
distinction between its supply chain due diligence
not explicitly referenced in the policy. However, the
practices as conducted for 3T and gold and practices,
policy states that:
if any, that would be carried out for cobalt. The
company states that since cobalt is not explicitly
“Volkswagen along with other companies and
required to be included in the annual report filed
trade associations welcomes the proposition of
under US Dodd Frank 1502, it is not subject to the
same standards. improving transparency in the raw materials
sector, which is of great importance to the
This appears to be indicative of a broader perception economic development of producing countries.”
expressed by companies referred to in this report
that, if it is not required under law, then it does not This reflects an acknowledgement by the corporate
need to be done. This is despite the OECD Guidance sector that better transparency in cobalt supply
applying to all minerals sourced from conflict affected chains is necessary. That said, VW does not disclose
or high-risk areas and the OECD issuing clarification any specific details relating to actual human rights
to this effect. risks identified as a result of conducting its own due
diligence within their mineral supply chains.
Volkswagen (VW) confirmed that it did not have an
“active” relationship with BAK, but that it did with ATL, BAK, BYD and Dell did not respond to Amnesty
Tianjin Lishen.299 VW wrote that it contacted Tianjin International.
298. Letter from Vodafone, 29 October 2015 (See Annex). In a follow up email, Vodafone wrote to clarify that “it does not source batteries from China-based
companies. Vodafone added that, after checking, it was not aware of their use in any Vodafone-branded devices.” Email from Vodafone, 12 January 2016.
299. Letter from VW, 18 December 2015 (see annex).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

62 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
L & F MATERIAL CO.’S POTENTIAL LG Chem advised Amnesty International that it asked
L&F Materials to contact Huayou Cobalt to confirm
CUSTOMER NETWORK
Amnesty International findings and let LG Chem know
of the steps it is taking to prevent “further problems.”
LG Chem added that:
POTENTIAL L&F COBALT SUPPLY CHAIN
“We are discussing whether there is a need
According to publicly available information
for us to conduct our own inspection on the
cobalt mining areas in Katanga, together
with a 3rd party inspector. If the risk of
Battery component
manufacturers human rights violations is confirmed to be
L&F Material
very high and serious through the inspection,
Battery manufacturer
we will consider taking a wide range of
Electronic goods and effective actions to stop the violations, such
vehicle manufacturers
as suspending or terminating business with
* Indicates companies those suppliers who procure cobalt from
which deny a connection Samsung
to this potential supply SDI* LG Chem such mines.”
chain and/or to DRC cobalt.
While Amnesty International welcomes LG Chem’s
response that it will undertake an inspection, it is
essential that LG Chem take active steps to address
Apple Apple instances of child labour and other human rights
Samsung* LG
abuses before terminating any contractual relationships.
As with other companies, LG details its policy
towards the so-called “conflict minerals” of 3T and
gold, but has no similar due diligence system in
place for other minerals such as cobalt.
In a newspaper interview in October 2014, the
company’s CEO Lee Bong-won said it supplied battery According to Samsung SDI’s reply, the source of
materials to Samsung SDI, LG Chem Ltd. (LG Chem) cathode materials that L&F Material supplies to it
and electric vehicle battery manufacturers based in comes from a Japanese firm and not from Huayou
Japan, North America and Europe.300 Cobalt.302 However, the company did not explain
how it knows this information, nor if any efforts have
been made to follow that supply chain further to the
ANALYSIS OF COMPANY RESPONSES point of the smelter. L&F did not respond directly to
Amnesty International’s letter. As referred to earlier,
Samsung SDI stated that due to the complexity of the
LG Chem confirmed that Huayou Cobalt was a
supply chain, “it is impossible for us to determine
“second-tier” supplier and that “Huayou Cobalt
whether the cobalt supplied to Samsung SDI comes
which supplies cobalt oxide to one of our cathode
from DRC Katanga’s mines.”
materials suppliers, L&F Materials, purchases
cobalt concentrate and crude cobalt hydroxide from Samsung SDI also denied having any business
CDM.”301 relationship with Huayou Cobalt.
300. Korean Joongang Daily, L&F Material Charges Ahead In Secondary Batteries, 6 October 2014, available at http://koreajoongangdaily.joins.com/news/
article/article.aspx?aid=2995702 (accessed 29 June 2015).
301. Letter from LG Chem, 13 November 2015 (see Annex).
302. Letter from Samsung SDI, 23 November 2015 (see Annex).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 63
Apple named both Samsung SDI and LG Chem as According to a 2010 investor document, Tianjin
among its leading suppliers in 2014.303 Its response Bamo’s largest customers are BYD, Tianjin Lishen,
to Amnesty International is found in the sub-section and Coslight Group (Coslight).304 As stated above,
above (see: Ningbo Shanshan’s customers). BYD and Tianjin Lishen are also both supplied by
Ningbo Shanshan.305 Coslight is a Chinese battery
manufacturer and its website states that its main
customers are mobile phone manufacturers such
TIANJIN BAMO’S POTENTIAL
as Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. (Huawei), ZTE,
CUSTOMER NETWORK OKWAP and AHong.306
ANALYSIS OF COMPANY RESPONSES
POTENTIAL TIANJIN BAMO COBALT
SUPPLY CHAIN
According to publicly available information Huawei, the Chinese communications giant,
confirmed that it was supplied by both Coslight and
Tianjin Lishen.307 After receiving Amnesty International’s
Battery component * Indicates companies letter, Huawei wrote that it contacted both companies
manufacturers which deny a connection about their cobalt purchases. Coslight and Tianjin Lishen
to this potential supply
both replied that their supplier, Tianjin Bamo advised
Battery manufacturer chain and/or to DRC cobalt.
that it had “no business dealings” with Huayou Cobalt.
Electronic goods and
vehicle manufacturers Huawei provided no information about its steps to
verify this information. Similarly, Coslight does not
describe any independent steps taken by it to identify
Tianjin Bamo and verify its smelters, including whether Huayou is
Technology* part of its cobalt supply chain. The claim by Tianjin
Bamo contradicts statements by Huayou Cobalt,
including its most recent Annual Report, which
identified Tianjin Bamo as one of the largest buyers
of its cobalt products in 2014, and detailed the size
of its trade.308 Amnesty International concludes that
Tianjin
Coslight*
Lishen* without further substantiation, Tianjin Bamo’s denial
of having links to Huayou Cobalt lacks credibility.
Huawei did not describe having a supply chain due
diligence policy that would meet international
Apple Ahong
Dell BYD Huawei* standards. It does not mention cobalt, and writes
HP* OKWAP that it “has progressively imposed the prohibition on
Huawei* (Inventec)*
the purchase of tantalum, tin and tungsten among
Lenovo ZTE
(Motorola) suppliers since 2002.”
Microsoft
Samsung*
Vodafone* Inventec, owner of OKWAP, wrote that the company
VW* had not purchased from Coslight.
AHong and ZTE made no comment.
303. Apple Inc., Supplier List 2015.
304. Tianjin Bamo Technology Co., Ltd, IPO Draft prospectus, 2010, p. 105-6, http://www.p5w.net/stock/ssgsyj/zqgg/201003P020100312823643990756.
pdf (accessed 29 June 2015).
305. Ningbo Shanshan Co. Ltd., Annual Report 2014, p. 19.
306. Coslight, About Us, available at http://www.cncoslight.com/English/company.asp (accessed 21 December 2015).
307. Letter from Huawei, 16 November 2015 (see Annex).
308. Huayou Cobalt Ltd, Prospectus for First Phase of Short-term Financing Bills of 2014, p. 68; Annual Report 2014, p. 12.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

64 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
OVERALL CONCLUSIONS: details of specific investigations and checks that
they have undertaken to identify and address child
DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES’
labour in their cobalt supply chains. Many said they
COBALT SUPPLY CHAIN DUE were members of an industry initiative, the Electronics
Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC), which has
DILIGENCE PRACTICES
established a code of conduct.311 However, none of
the companies approached by Amnesty International
According to prevailing international standards, said that they had been in touch with Huayou Cobalt
companies that use DRC cobalt in their products prior to receiving our letter. None said that they had
should be sourcing that mineral responsibly. Therefore sought to exercise due diligence on their cobalt supply
they should be aware of, and address, the risks chain or trace where the cobalt in their products had
associated with its extraction and trading. Many come from prior to receiving our letter.
red flags exist in relation to cobalt extraction in the
DRC. More than half of the world’s cobalt is mined Many of these companies stated that they have a
there in high-risk areas. The fact that children work zero tolerance policy when it comes to child labour
in these artisanal mining areas – and the hazardous in their supply chains. Some of these companies
conditions under which people are extracting cobalt refer to contractual requirements that they impose
more generally – have been reported for years.309 on direct suppliers to ensure that they adhere to
these types of prohibitions. Others refer to specific
“Downstream” companies should have exercised, provisions that the company has developed in relation
and on an ongoing basis continue to exercise, due to the child’s rehabilitation into education and/or
diligence on their cobalt supply chain, including financial support should this be found in factories.
by tracing their suppliers up to their smelters. They However, they did not provide any information on
should also address the due diligence practices of whether these policies are being implemented in
their smelter (in this instance Huayou Cobalt) in relation to the DRC cobalt supply chain. It is
responding to identified risks. How a downstream unclear what remediation measures the companies
company responds depends on its position in the will take if children are found to be working in the
supply chain. Companies that have the most leverage mining areas themselves rather than in a factory.312
over Huayou Cobalt – such as large, influential This represents a serious gap in the implementation
companies or battery component manufacturers that of these policies, particularly considering the
sit closer in the chain to Huayou – have a greater likelihood that the companies may already have
responsibility to exercise their leverage for these sourced cobalt which was mined in conditions which
purposes.310 These activities can also be undertaken breach children and adult miners’ human rights.
with other companies within the industry or through
industry schemes – although companies remain Only Apple and Microsoft said that they had taken
individually responsible for their own due diligence. any sort of proactive steps to address human rights
In their letters to Amnesty International, most issues in the artisanal mines in southern DRC. In
companies referred to their own internal policies on Apple’s case, this is at a very early stage, with the
responsible sourcing. They said that they take company “currently evaluating dozens of different
human rights seriously and many mentioned that materials, including cobalt, in order to identify
they require suppliers to respect human rights and labour and environmental risks as well as opportunities
not employ children. However, they did not provide for Apple to bring about effective, scalable and
309. E.g. Guerin, Orla, DR Congo’s child miner shame, BBC News, 12 June 2006, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/5071172.stm (accessed 9 June 2015)
310. OECD Guidance, p. 44.
311. Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition, Code of Conduct, http://www.eiccoalition.org/standards/code-of-conduct/
312. See Table of Company Responses. It should be noted that hazardous working conditions are not as clearly addressed in the responses received by companies.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 65
sustainable change.” Microsoft said it was already Conflict Minerals report [the report that
supporting an organisation that was tackling human certain companies are required to file under
rights abuses, including child labour, in artisanal section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank Act] and
mines in southern DRC. therefore [not] subject to the same level of due
diligence as the other minerals noted above.”
As for tracing the mineral through its supply chain to
the smelter, Microsoft stated that in practice, “tracing Samsung SDI wrote that:
metals such as cobalt up through multiple layers of
our supply chain is extremely complex.” Microsoft “the company investigated the country of
wrote that creating such a tracing mechanism would origin of cobalt which is not on the current
require “a large degree of vertical and cross-industry list of conflict minerals. However, in reality,
collaboration.” Yet, no further details were provided it is very hard to trace the source of the
on actual attempts made by the company to trace mineral due to suppliers’ nondisclosure of
this chain in practice. Compared to the supply chain information and the complexity of supply
due diligence that many companies have started to chains.”
develop in relation to 3T and gold, Amnesty
International’s research has shown that cobalt is no Apple states that with regards to conflict minerals
more difficult. In fact, research carried out in this report (defined by it as 3T), it
suggests that the trade in cobalt is more concentrated
since so much of it is sourced from the DRC. “…goes beyond what is legally required
to drive further change in the DRC and
Most of the consumer facing companies we identified neighbouring countries. We provide significant
in Huayou Cobalt’s supply chain have a global funding and strategic guidance to several
presence. For them, supply chain due diligence programs that are increasing the number of
requirements for all minerals – as laid out by the registered miners operating in, and selling
OECD Guidance – are not new. Additionally, many their materials through, conflict-free channels,
of them are US listed companies subject to section providing educational and health care support
1502 of the Dodd-Frank Act reporting requirements, to mining communities, developing best
which requires them to check whether certain practices for small scale miners to improve
minerals in their products (tin, tantalum, tungsten their productivity and health & safety, and
(3T) and gold) are contributing to conflict or human improving methods for tracking and trading
rights abuses in the DRC or surrounding countries.313 materials from the mine to the smelter.”
As a result, they already have specific supply chain
due diligence policies on 3T and gold. Yet despite However, it detailed no equivalent programmes relating
the OECD Guidance applying to all mineral supply to cobalt.
chains, it is clear that these companies are currently
failing to operationalise the OECD’s five step due Despite the fact that the DRC is by far the world’s
diligence process beyond whatever they have put in largest source of cobalt, and that the poor conditions
place for 3T and gold. of its artisanal mines, and the presence of children
working in them, is well known, the responses
Vodafone, for example, wrote that: received demonstrate that very few downstream
companies that are purchasing cobalt, or products
“it is important to note that cobalt is not containing cobalt, are taking steps to meet even the
one of the minerals which is included in the most basic due diligence requirements.
313. US listed companies include Apple, Dell, HP and Microsoft. Section 1502, Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

66 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
ABSENT ROLE OF HOME STATES IN REQUIRING Regulation is required to ensure transparency in
COMPANIES TO BE TRANSPARENT ABOUT relation to the points of extraction, the conditions of
THEIR COBALT SUPPLY CHAINS extraction and trading, and the chain of custody
(actors involved) for cobalt. This will help to achieve
the greater objective of ensuring that those responsible
The research in this report exposes a clear gap in
for the human rights abuses (including the companies
relation to the role of home states, such as China,
who have on-going abuses such as child labour in
as well as many others, in requiring transparency
their supply chains) become part of the solution.
around cobalt supply chain practices. Currently, no
country legally requires companies to publicly report
The company responses clearly show that law is
on their cobalt supply chains. The result is that
required for them to carry out due diligence on their
companies can profit from on-going human rights
supply chains (on an on-going basis) and disclose
abuses in the cobalt supply chain, such as child
these practices in accordance with international
labour, without detection.
standards. As outlined above, a number of the
companies contacted referred to specific supply
The research also exposes conflicting information
chain due diligence policies that they have in place
regarding the traceability of actors in the cobalt supply
for 3T and gold, yet they draw a line when it comes
chain. On the one hand, public statistics indicate
to cobalt. One of the companies openly admits to
that most cobalt used in the world comes from the
this, underscoring the importance of regulation in
DRC. Yet, on the other hand, most of the companies
contacted by Amnesty International as identified in getting companies to carry out and disclose these
this report, deny sourcing cobalt from the DRC and/ practices for other minerals extracted from conflict
or from Huayou Cobalt, a company which has a affected or high-risk areas.
considerable presence in the industry as well as in
that country. The companies have made these Under international human rights law, states have a
denials despite publicly available information duty to protect against human rights abuses by all
identifying them as part of the supply chain. However, actors, including businesses. Amongst other things,
without any legal requirement for these companies to this requires governments to enact and enforce laws
disclose the basis on which they are coming to these that require businesses to respect human rights,
conclusions (i.e. no links to child labour, DRC cobalt create a regulatory environment that facilitates business
or Huayou Cobalt), Amnesty International cannot respect for human rights, and provide guidance to
independently evaluate or challenge their assertions. companies on their responsibilities.314 An effective
As a result of this lack of transparency, the people at way of achieving these objectives would be for host
the beginning of the supply chain, who suffer human and home states to adopt regulations that require
rights abuses, are no better off in terms of having corporate due diligence and disclosure in relation to
their situation improved and right to remedy realised. cobalt and other minerals extracted or sourced from
Yet, companies are still able to profit. conflict-affected or high-risk areas.
314. UNGPs, State Duty to Protect Human Rights (Principles 1, 2 and 3).
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 67
Chinese government should immediately engage with
the company on the issues raised in this report. They
CONCLUSION AND
should ensure that the company addresses the serious
RECOMMENDATIONS issues within their cobalt supply chain as well as
remediate the harm suffered by people whose human
rights have been abused.
The government of the Democratic Republic of the The US, South Korea, and many other states where the
Congo (DRC) is failing to meet its obligations to companies identified in this report are headquartered,
protect people from abuses of their rights to and at are failing to play a meaningful role. At a minimum,
work and health through its failure to put in place they should require greater transparency around cobalt
and enforce adequate safeguards for artisanal miners supply chain practices. Currently, no country legally
working in unauthorized areas. The government requires companies to publicly report on their cobalt
should create more Zones d’exploitation artisanale supply chains. Regulation is required to ensure
(Artisanal Mining Zones or ZEAs) and, wherever this transparency in relation to the points of extraction,
is possible taking into account safety and policy the conditions of extraction and trading, and the
considerations, regularize unauthorized mining areas. chain of custody (actors involved) for cobalt. This
Where this is not possible, the government should will help to achieve the greater objective of ensuring
support artisanal miners in finding other authorized that those responsible for the human rights abuses
sites and help create alternative employment options. (including companies that have on-going abuses
It should extend and enforce new labour and safety such as child labour in their supply chains) become
protections, and provide support in realising these part of the solution.
protections, to all artisanal miners.
Under international human rights law, all states have
The government has failed to put in place an adequate a duty to protect against human rights abuses by all
system to monitor and enforce the labour standards actors, including businesses throughout their global
that do exist, including on the worst forms of child operations. Among other things, this requires all
labour. There continues to be a serious gap between governments to enact and enforce laws requiring
the age of compulsory education and the minimum corporate due diligence and public disclosure in relation
age of employment increasing children’s vulnerability to cobalt and other minerals.
to ending up in the worst forms of child labour. The
government has yet to remove financial and other Companies should undertake and publicly disclose
barriers that children face in accessing primary their due diligence practices. Companies have a
education and to ensure that all children are able to responsibility to mitigate and take corrective measures
access free and compulsory primary education. It is for the victims if they have failed to respect human
essential that the government adopt and implement rights at any point during their operations. This
the National Action Plan to Eliminate the Worst requires that a company not simply discontinue a
Forms of Child Labour, as a matter of urgency. trading relationship with a supplier or embargo DRC
cobalt once human rights risks have been identified
There is also a clear gap when it comes to the in the supply chain. If human rights abuses have
regulations by home states of companies operating occurred at any point in the supply chain, the company
in the DRC and/or companies whose supply chains must, in cooperation with other relevant actors,
include cobalt mined from artisanal mines in the such as its suppliers and national authorities, take
DRC where adults and children work in hazardous action to remediate the harm suffered by the people
conditions. As the home state of Huayou Cobalt, the affected.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

68 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE • Systematically collect, monitor and make available
information on child labour complaints as well as
GOVERNMENT OF THE DRC
the types and numbers of inspections conducted,
citations issued, prosecutions undertaken, and
FOR THE MINISTRY OF MINES TO:
penalties applied in relation to child labour
violations.
• Create new authorized artisanal zones (Zones • In cooperation with the Ministry of Health, put in
d’exploitation artisanale or ZEA’s) in accessible place health monitoring and treatment services for
and productive mine sites. Through SAESSCAM artisanal miners to assess and treat occupational
(Service d’Assistance et d’Encadrement du diseases.
Small Scale Mining), support the formalisation of
mining activities through the creation of miners’
co-operatives. FOR THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION TO:
• Regularize unauthorized mining areas, where
this is possible taking into account safety and • Remove financial and other barriers to accessing
policy considerations. Where this is not possible, primary education and provide for free and
support artisanal miners in moving to other compulsory education, as decreed by President
authorized sites and help create alternative Joseph Kabila in 2010.
employment options. • Reintegrate into the school system children
• Provide all artisanal miners, including those in whose education has been disrupted because of
unauthorized mining areas, with safety equipment, their involvement in artisanal mining.
such as boots, protective headgear and appropriate
face masks.
• As a matter of priority, provide technical support FOR THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE TO:
and health and safety training, through SAESSCAM,
to artisanal miners in unauthorized mining areas. • Investigate reports that officials are extorting
• Ensure that SAESSCAM has the mandate and illegal payments from artisanal miners. Those
sufficient resources to provide technical and suspected of having perpetrated offences must
other support to all artisanal miners, including be prosecuted according to international fair trial
those working in unauthorized mining areas. standards, and preventative measures must be
put in place to avoid any recurrences.
FOR THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR TO:
FOR PARLIAMENT AND THE PRIME MINISTER TO:
• Remove children from artisanal mining and in
cooperation with the Ministry of Gender, Women • Revise the age for compulsory education to 16
and Children and Ministry of Education, put in years to be equivalent to the minimum age for
place measures to address children’s health, employment.
physical, educational, economic and psychological • Amend/revise the Mining Code and Regulations
needs. Ensure that reintegration activities are to include adequate labour and safety standards,
aligned with income-generating opportunities which are applicable to all artisanal miners.
available within the community. • Revise the Mining Code to include requirements
• Ensure that the labour inspectorate has sufficient on all buying houses to conduct human rights
resources and training to monitor and enforce due diligence on cobalt and other minerals
labour laws in artisanal mining areas and to that they buy from artisanal miners and to refer
address the worst forms of child labour. artisanal miners to SAESCCAM for support where
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 69
they encounter poor working conditions. “respect human rights throughout all business
• Implement in full and adequately resource the operations” in relation to the statutory obligations
National Action Plan to Combat the Worst Forms for Chinese companies.
of Child Labour.
• Ratify ILO Convention No. 155 on Occupational FOR THE CHINESE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF
Safety and Health, 1981, ILO Convention No. METALS MINERALS & CHEMICALS IMPORTERS
176 on Safety and Health in Mines, 1995 and & EXPORTERS (CCCMC) TO:
the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child. • Require Chinese companies, including Huayou
• Seek international assistance and cooperation, Cobalt, to put in place processes for conducting
including technical cooperation, as necessary, to supply chain due diligence following the five-step
implement these recommendations. process set out in the OECD and CCCMC Due
Diligence Guidelines and to report publicly on
the steps taken by each company to manage
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
and mitigate human rights risks in its business
operations.
GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S
• Work with companies, audit experts, and NGOs
REPUBLIC OF CHINA
to formulate audit protocols and standards for
cobalt and other mineral resources beyond tin,
FOR THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE OF THE tantalum, tungsten and gold.
PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (MOFCOM) TO:
RECOMMENDATIONS TO OTHER
• Initiate a review of Huayou Cobalt’s supply chain
due diligence processes with a view to assessing HOME STATES (COUNTRIES
their adequacy for identifying, preventing, and
WHERE MULTINATIONAL
mitigating human rights risks.
• With respect to the Measures for the COMPANIES THAT TRADE IN,
Administration of Overseas Investment:
OR PURCHASE COBALT, ARE
– Amend Article 20 to add “respect human
rights throughout all business operations” to HEADQUARTERED)
the list of company obligations.
– Enact policies with reference to Article 24
• Legally require companies to conduct human
requiring companies that extract, process,
rights due diligence on their mineral supply
trade, transport, or use mineral products from
chains, and report publicly on their due diligence
conflict-affected or high-risk areas to disclose
policies and practices in accordance with
the steps being taken to manage and mitigate
international standards.
human rights risks in their business operations.
• Provide international cooperation and assistance
to the government of the DRC to support its
efforts to extend labour protections to all artis-
FOR THE STANDING COMMITTEE OF THE
anal miners and remove children from the worst
NATIONAL PEOPLE’S CONGRESS TO:
forms of child labour.
• Amend Article 5, Paragraph 1 of the Company
Law of the People’s Republic of China to add
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

70 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE FOR HUAYOU COBALT TO:
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE
• Take action, in cooperation with national authorities,
ON THE GREAT LAKES REGION
international agencies and civil society, to
remediate the harms suffered by adult and child
(ICGLR)
artisanal miners that the company has been
sourcing from. This includes developing and
• Call on member states, including the DRC, to
implementing a plan to remove children from the
legally require companies to add cobalt to the
worst forms of child labour, support children’s
list of minerals requiring mandatory human rights
reintegration into the school system and address
due diligence in line with the OECD Guidance.
children’s health, physical, educational, economic
• Call on member states to legally require companies
and psychological needs.
to conduct human rights due diligence on their
• Address human rights risks throughout its
mineral supply chains, and report publicly on
their due diligence policies and practices, in business operations, with particular focus on the
accordance with international standards. elimination of human rights abuses in the cobalt
supply chain of its wholly owned subsidiary, Congo
Dongfang International Mining SARL.
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE OECD • Conduct supply chain due diligence following
the five-step process set out in the OECD and
CCCMC Due Diligence Guidelines. This includes
• Call on states to legally require companies to
identifying where minerals are extracted, chain
conduct human rights due diligence on their
of custody, and the conditions of trading.
mineral supply chains, and report publicly on
• Publicly disclose the steps taken to identify, assess
their due diligence policies and practices, in
accordance with international standards. and mitigate human rights risks and abuses in
• Ask states to report on measures taken to ensure its business operations.
the implementation of the OECD Guidance,
including public disclosure requirements, and
compliance by companies. TO DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES IN HUAYOU’S
COBALT SUPPLY CHAIN:
RECOMMENDATIONS TO
• Conduct supply chain due diligence for cobalt
COMPANIES: and other minerals and publicly disclose their
due diligence policies and practices in accordance
with international standards, including the identity
• Conduct supply chain due diligence for cobalt
of smelters in their supply chain and their actual
and other minerals and publicly disclose their due
or potential associated human rights risks.
diligence policies and practices in accordance
with international standards, including how • Take action, in cooperation with other relevant
human rights risks are identified, prevented and actors, such as its smelters and national
addressed in global operations. authorities, to remediate the harm suffered by
• Take remedial action, in cooperation with other
people whose human rights have been abused
relevant actors, if human rights abuses have
at any point in the supply chain. This includes
occurred at any point in a supply chain relationship.
ensuring that a plan is put in place and
Revise due diligence and other policies to clarify
implemented to remove children from the
what corrective measures will be taken by the
worst forms of child labour, support children’s
company if human rights abuses exist at the
point of extraction, in the mining areas themselves reintegration into the school system and address
and at other points in the supply chain (including children’s health, physical, educational, economic
but not limited to the factories of suppliers). and psychological needs.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 71
ANNEX
Letter from Huayou Cobalt
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

72 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Chinese letter from Huayou Cobalt, page 1
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 73
Chinese letter from Huayou Cobalt, page 2
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

74 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Chinese letter from Huayou Cobalt, page 3
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 75
SUMMARY OF RESPONSES RECEIVED FROM DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES
(Full copies accessible at amnesty.org)
TABLE 1: Companies potentially buying from Ningbo Shanshan as part of Huayou Cobalt’s supply chain
Company
Apple Inc. Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
1 Infinite Loop Currently under evaluation.
Cupertino, CA 95014
United States of America Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Currently under evaluation.
Annual turnover: Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
US$233,715,000,0001 for Child labour:
fiscal year ended 26 September “Underage labor is never tolerated in our supply chain and we are proud to have led the industry in
2015 pioneering new safeguards. We not only have strict standards, rigorous audits and industry-leading
preventative measures, but we also actively look for any violations. Any supplier found hiring underage
workers must 1) fund the worker’s safe return home, 2) fully finance the worker’s education at a school
Annual net profit: chosen by the worker and his or her family, 3) continue to pay the worker’s wages, and 4) offer the worker
US$53,394,000,0002 for fiscal a job when he or she reaches the legal age.”
year ended 26 September 2015
“We have been reporting on our supply chain for 10 years because we believe transparency and the
feedback that comes with it makes us better. Of more than 1.6 million workers covered in 633 audits in
2014, our auditors uncovered 16 cases of underage labor and all were successfully addressed. We take
any concerns seriously and investigate every allegation.”
Conflict Minerals (specific to tin, tungsten, tantalum and gold):
“In the last 5 years, Apple worked with peers and stakeholders to implement and improve an industry
wide standard, drove compliance with the Conflict Free Sourcing Program or equivalent third party
audit programs, and expanded traceability to the mine site. As of November 2015, over 95% of our
reported smelters are compliant or participating in a third party audit verifying their conflict-free sourcing
practices. And we will not stop until we reach our goal of 100%.”
“Apple goes beyond what is legally required to drive further change in the DRC and neighboring countries.
We provide significant funding and strategic guidance to several programs that are increasing the number
of registered miners operating in, and selling their materials through, conflict-free channels, providing
educational and health care support to mining communities, developing best practices for small scale
miners to improve their productivity and health & safety, and improving methods for tracking and trading
materials from the mine to the smelter.”
Specific to cobalt:
“We are currently evaluating dozens of different materials, including cobalt, in order to identify labor and
environmental risks as well as opportunities for Apple to bring about effective, scalable and sustainable
change. As we gain a better understanding of the challenges associated with cobalt we believe our work in
the African Great Lakes region and Indonesia will serve as important guides for creating lasting solutions.”
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

76 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Daimler AG Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
70546 Stuttgart Company’s procurement practices do not: “engage in any traceable mineral or commodity purchasing
Germany activities in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Concerning the particular case at hand we can confirm
that we neither source from the DRC or the mentioned companies directly.”
Annual turnover: “Due to the high complexity of automotive supply chains, we are, however, not able to definitely confirm
129,872,000,000 €3 for fiscal whether or not cobalt in our products originates from this region or from the mentioned companies at any
year ended 31 December 2014 stage within our supply chains.”
(US$141,345,242,0004) Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
After a review via its internal procurement and human rights processes, the company states that “neither
Ningbo Shanshan Co. Ltd., nor any of the other companies which were named by you are in fact Daimler
Annual net profit: suppliers.”
7,290,000,000 €5 for fiscal
year ended 31 December 2014 Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
“Daimler is committed to adhering to international human rights standards in line with the UN Guiding
(US$7,934,018,0006) Principles on Business and Human Rights…We see this commitment as extending to, and including, the
ILO core-norms and also, specifically, ILO Norm 182 on the worst forms of child labour.”
“Our ‘Supplier Sustainability Standards’ impose strict obligations with respect to working conditions,
social standards, environmental standards and business ethics that go beyond the requirements of the
law. These obligations are an integral component of the contractual agreements, which Daimler concludes
with its suppliers. By signing the contract, the supplier is expected to implement and verify that these
requirements are adhered to by its own suppliers.”
“Within these standards we explicitly state that ‘Child labor is not allowed at any phase of production or
processing. As a minimum, suppliers are requested to comply with the ILO’s conventions on minimum
employment age and the ban on child labor. Children must not be inhibited in their development. Their
health and safety must not be impaired’.”
“Our suppliers undertake to comply with these standards, communicate them to their employees, and
apply them to their upstream value chains. We support them for this with regular information and training
measures. We regularly assess our suppliers’ compliance with sustainability standards on the basis of
a risk analysis conducted according to country and commodity group risks…In the event of suspicious
cases or specific violations, we follow up with an established escalation process…up to and including the
termination of the business relationship.”
“Our company reports annually about its sustainability management in supplier relationships within the
Daimler Sustainability Report.”
The company provided its Supplier Sustainability Standards, Integrity Code, and Annual Sustainability
Report.
HP Inc Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
1501 Page Mill Rd Based on the information provided by Amnesty International, HP is “conducting an investigation with our
Palo Alto, suppliers. As of now we have not found any linkage between our products and the DRC mine. If a linkage
CA 94304-1126 is found, we will take steps to address the risks you have raised.”
United States
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Company does not refer to Huayou Cobalt or name any specific suppliers.
Annual turnover:
US$103,355,000,0007 for Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
fiscal year ended 31 October “We expect our suppliers to conduct their worldwide operations in a socially and environmentally
2015 responsible manner pursuant to HP’s Supply Chain Social and Environmental Responsibility Policy and
consistent with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.”
Annual net profit: “We pride ourselves on being an ethical company – one where employees are proud to work and a
US$4,554,000,0008 for fiscal company with which customers, business partners and suppliers want to do business. To that end, we are
year ended 31 October 2015 continuing our efforts to communicate our high standards for suppliers through HP’s Supplier Code of
Conduct (which prohibits forced, child and prison labor), our Global Human Rights Policy, the California
Transparency in Supply Chains Disclosure, and our specialized standards to address unique risks to
student and dispatch workers as well as foreign migrant workers in our supply chain.”
“As an EICC member, we also participate in the identification and sharing of leading practices, and
we engage in other collaborative alliances with Verité, Social Accountability International (SAI), the
Global Business Initiative on Human Rights (GBI), among others, to exchange information on issues and
coordinate on ways to best protect workers in our supply chain.”
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 77
Huawei Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
No response provided.
Huawei Industrial Park,
Yuting Road Chenghua
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Industrial Area,
Company denies being part of Huayou’s cobalt supply chain.
Chenghai Dist.
SHANTOU, GNG 515800
Details: “Huawei … contacted the two suppliers, Tianjin Lishen and Coslight, to conduct a review and
China
investigation. Upon investigation by Tianjin Lishen and Coslight, the two suppliers and their upstream
suppliers have all confirmed that the cathode materials supplied hadn’t used raw materials from Huayou
Cobalt, and that the issues mentioned in your [Amnesty International’s] letter, such as human rights
Annual turnover:
abuses, haven’t been found in their cathode materials supply chain.”
US$46,515,000,0009 for fiscal
year ended 31 December 2014
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
“As a member of the UN Global Compact and GeSI, Huawei has always put global social responsibility as
our goal and conducted ethical purchasing. We clearly prohibit the behaviours mentioned in your letter,
Annual net profit:
such as the use of child labour and abuse of labour rights, and demand all our suppliers to comply.
US$4,498,000,00010 for fiscal
Huawei has now established comprehensive and sound supplier accreditation and management systems
year ended 31 December 2014
to ensure that the suppliers meet sustainability requirements. Based on the Electronics Industry Code
of Conduct (EICC), Huawei has developed a sustainability agreement for suppliers covering five parts
including labour standards, health and safety, environmental protection, business ethics and management
systems. It demands suppliers to comply with the laws and regulations in their host countries or areas
as well as international standards, and bear social and environmental responsibilities. Huawei conducts
comprehensive and systematic accreditation on all newly introduced suppliers, to evaluate their capacities
and levels of compliance with laws, regulations and the sustainability agreement. Huawei asks accredited
suppliers to develop plans for continuous improvement and conduct regular internal reviews according to
the requirements of the sustainability agreement.”
“Huawei has progressively imposed the prohibition on the purchase of tantalum, tin and tungsten among
suppliers since 2002. In addition, the Company also actively participates in GESI/CFSI (Conflict-Free
Sourcing Initiative) to address the issue of conflict minerals with the whole industry.”
The company provided its 2014 Sustainability Report and supplier’s investigation statement.
Lenovo Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
(Motorola Mobility is a Lenovo does not directly address the question, but states that it has not “…previously detected human
rights abuses in the cobalt supply chain.”
wholly-owned subsidiary
of Lenovo) Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
“Tianjin Lishen is not currently in the direct supply chain for products manufactured by Lenovo or
No. 6 Shangdi West Road,
Motorola. CDM and Huayou Cobalt have not been otherwise identified as cobalt processors in either
Haidian District
Lenovo’s or Motorola’s supply chain…However, we are aware of two third-party trademark licensees that
BEIJING, BEJ 100085
source batteries from Tianjin Lishen for products that they manufacture to be sold under the Motorola
China
brand. We will work with Tianjin Lishen and trademark licensees to investigate the concerns raised...If we
verify that these concerns are valid, Lenovo will instruct our licensees to discontinue their use of Tianjin
Lishen unless or until [it] can demonstrate compliance to Lenovo’s requirements.”
Annual turnover:
Lenovo’s revenue was
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
US$46,295,593,000 for year
“Our agreements with trademark licensees require them to abide by our Supplier Code of Conduct, which
ending 31 March 201511
prohibits them from using suppliers that utilise child labour. Lenovo has policies and practices in place to
identify and prevent human rights violations in the supply chain for Lenovo and Motorola products. Some
key practices include:
Annual net profit:
US$836,603,000 for year
- As a member of the EICC, we have adopted the EICC Code of Conduct in the operation of our internal
ending 31 March 201512
and external supply chain. Specifically, we require our suppliers to sign formal agreements that require
them to comply with the EICC Code of Conduct, provide annual formal self-assessments reported through
EICC tools, conduct biennial audits with EICC approved third party auditors, and provide Lenovo with
the resulting audit reports and corrective action plans. The EICC Code itself and our contracts require
that suppliers flow-down these requirements through all tiers of the supply chain, including refiners and
smelters. A significant percentage of Lenovo’s total procurement spend comes from suppliers who are
themselves EICC members and conduct similar operations as a requirement of their EICC membership.
– We participate in the EICC Conflict Free Smelter Initiative (CFSI) for due diligence on 3TG in the DRC
and surrounding countries… While the CFSI and hundreds of its member companies currently concentrate
on processes related to 3TG in the DRC, Lenovo will continue to support and participate in EICC efforts to
develop new programs that address further risks with other minerals and commodities.”
Company also states that it publishes an annual Sustainability Report, is a signatory to the UN Global
Compact, and posts its commitment to eliminating inappropriate labour practices on its website.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

78 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Microsoft Corporation Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
One Microsoft Way Company is unable to say “with absolute assurance” whether or not cobalt in its products originates in
Redmond, Katanga in the DRC.
WA 98052-6399
United States of America Details: “Tracing metals such as cobalt up through multiple layers of our supply chain is extremely
complex...Tracking the origin of the cobalt metal in [the different compounds used in Microsoft products]
to the precise mining area is extremely challenging. Due to our supply chain complexity and the in-region
Annual turnover: co-mingling of materials, we are unable to say with absolute assurance that any or none of our cobalt
US$93,580,000,00013 for sources can be traced to ore mined in the Katanga region. To create such a tracing mechanism would
fiscal year ended 30 June 2015 require a large degree of vertical and cross-industry collaboration.”
Annual net profit: Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
US$12,193,000,00014 for “We have not traced the cobalt used in Microsoft products through our supply chain to the smelter level
fiscal year ended 30 June 2015 due to the complexity and resources required.”
“We can confirm that we currently contract with [Tianjin Lishen] to provide a very limited number of
batteries for a product development project. To our knowledge, Lishen batteries are not used in any
product currently sold by Microsoft. Due to the small volumes used, Tianjin Lishen is not listed on
Microsoft Top 100 Hardware Supplier List… We took immediate action by asking Tianjin Lishen to remove
this reference [on its website] to Microsoft as it is a misuse of the Microsoft name and implies incorrectly
that we have a major contractual relationship. Lishen has complied with Microsoft’s request.”
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
Child labour:
“Microsoft does not tolerate the use of child, involuntary or forced labour in our supply chain…To ensure
our policies are being followed, we require our suppliers to incorporate our code of conduct and related
requirements into their contracts with Microsoft. We train our suppliers and auditors to our specifications
and also directly assess our Tier 1 and strategic component suppliers and monitor for such abuses. To
eliminate the risk of underage labor, Microsoft does not allow persons under the age of 18 to work on
lines dedicated to Microsoft products. We also require our Tier 1 suppliers to monitor further upstream to
ensure that laws regarding underage workers are respected and enforced.”
“Underage labor has become a rarity in our contracted supply chain due to Microsoft’s stringent practices.
Were an underage worker to be identified, related work would cease immediately. The factory would be
required to pay the underage worker wages through his/her majority and safely escort the worker home.”
“In general, actions for non-compliance with our requirements include at a minimum, corrective action
plans and follow up verification audits. Further actions may include increased audit frequency, additional
assessment, remedial training, certification and termination of the business relationship. In most cases,
we are able to influence suppliers to put needed measures in place.”
Mineral supply chain:
“Microsoft’s “Responsible Sourcing of Raw Materials” Policy extends our Supplier Code of Conduct
to the furthest reaches of our upstream supply chain in support of human rights, labor, health and
safety, environmental protection, and business ethics. This commitment is global in scope and applies
to all substances used in our products, unbounded by materials or location. Our extended strategy
for responsible sourcing of raw materials focuses on a combination of building cross-industry sector
capability, supporting electronics industry efforts, and working with in-region expert NGOs.”
“Microsoft has not identified human rights abuses in its upstream supply chain related to cobalt
extraction.”
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 79
Samsung Electronics Co., Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
No response provided.
Ltd.
129, Samsung-ro,
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Yeongtong-gu,
Company states that neither CDM nor Huayou Cobalt are registered suppliers and thus Samsung does
Suwon-si,
“not carry out any business transactions with both companies”. However, it does not state whether they
Gyeonggi-do,
are in their supply chain. Company confirms that Samsung SDI is a supplier of Samsung Electronics, and
South Korea
that “we have requested additional information regarding CDM and Huayou Cobalt.”
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
Annual turnover:
Child labour:
Korean Won
“Samsung maintains “a zero tolerance policy on child labor”…Samsung has taken steps and established
206,205,987,000,00015 for
strict policies to prevent child labor in our facilities and supplier companies. Samsung established
fiscal year ended 31 December
[a] dedicated team to continuously monitor, assess and improve every aspect of working conditions of
2014
supplier facilities to meet our own high standards. Since 2012, we have instituted a supplier code of
conduct based on Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC) guidelines and enforced these policies
(US$188,829,000,000)
through the annual self-assessment, on-site audits and 3rd party audits, which is carried out in forms of
both regular and unannounced. If a violation of child labour is found, contracts with suppliers who use
child labor will be immediately terminated.”
Annual net profit:
Korean Won
Mineral supply chain:
23,394,358,000,00017 for
“To ensure our sub-suppliers are also committed to our high standards, Samsung also mandate all of our
fiscal year ended 31 December
registered suppliers to complete the annual self-assessment, which is based on EICC checklist. During
2014
the annual self-assessment, suppliers are required to submit information about environment, social and
health compliance status of their suppliers (or Samsungs’s sub-suppliers).”
(US$21,423,000,000)
Human Rights Policy:
“Samsung has developed [a] human rights policy aligned with the UN Guiding Principles on Business
and Human Rights, OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises, the UN convention on the Rights of
the Child, and the laws of the countries in which we operate…In the future, we plan to publish our key
findings from Human Rights Impact Assessment of our business operations across the globe.”
Company provided its Child Labor Prohibition Policy in China and its Business Conduct Guidelines.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

80 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Samsung SDI Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
150-20 Gongse-ro, Company states that it is “impossible for us to determine whether the cobalt supplied to Samsung SDI
Giheung-gu, comes from DRC Katanga’s mines.”
Yongin-si,
Gyeonggi-do, Details:
South Korea “The corporate policy of Samsung SDI prohibits the use of minerals originated from conflict-affected
areas such as the DRC. Thus, the company conducts yearly investigations on our suppliers about the use
of concerned minerals and examines the refiners of 3TG, banned under US SEC’s conflict minerals rules.
Annual turnover: Adding to that, the company investigated the country of origin of cobalt which is not on the current list
Korean Won of conflict minerals. However, in reality, it is very hard to trace the source of the mineral due to suppliers’
5,474,221,641,00019 for year nondisclosure of information and the complexity of the supply chains.”
ended 31 December 2014
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
(US$5,012,920,00020) “Samsung SDI does not have any direct transactions [with CDM or Huayou Cobalt] and the two companies
are not in Samsung SDI’s supply chain.” L&F Material Co. “supplies Samsung SDI with cathode materials
for batteries. However, the source material of cathode materials that L&F Material Co supplies to Samsung
Annual net profit: SDI comes from a Japanese firm not from Huayou…Except for L&F Materials Co, Samsung SDI does not
Korean Won have any business relationship with other companies mentioned in your email.”
-80,314,437,00021 for year
ended 31 December 2014 Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
Child labour:
(US$-73,547,00022) “Samsung SDI strictly deals with any major violations of child labor and human right abuses across
the entire plants and suppliers around the globe. Up until now, there has been no case of child labor
violations reported or detected from Samsungs SDI’s plants or suppliers.”
Samsung SDI’s suppliers of source material of cathode materials “are required to have an approval from
Samsung SDI in its product development stage, which allows Samsung SDI to keep track of the original
supplier of concerned materials…Samsung SDI operates the S-Partner Certification Program as a way
to diagnose and improve CSR issues across its supply chain. For all suppliers, Samsung SDI conducts
written evaluations and on-site inspections in areas such as human right, labor, ethics, environment, and
health and safety on a two-year basis and awards them with certification. In 2014, the company selected
mandatory requirements, including child labour … and informed its suppliers of the rule that their
transactions with Samsung SDI may be terminated if they failed to meet the requirements. In addition…
Samsung SDI has required suppliers to sign a written pledge to ban child labor and provided training
on compliance for the employees of Samsung SDI’s suppliers. The evaluation items of the S-Partner
Certification Program satisfy the code of conduct of EICC.”
Company referenced its Sustainability Report, stating that through this report Samsung SDI discloses
“the result of CSR due diligence on its suppliers in areas of human rights, labor, health and safety, and
ethics.”
Sony Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
1-7-1 Konan Company “takes this issue seriously” and has been conducting a fact finding process, and “so far, we
Tokyo, -- 108-0075 could not find obvious results that our products contain cobalt originated from Katanga in the DRC. We
Japan will continue the assessment and pay close attention to this matter.”
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Annual turnover: Question not directly addressed by the company
Yen 8,215,880,000,00023 for
fiscal year ended 31 March Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
2015 “It is Sony Group policy to comply with all applicable laws and regulations of countries and regions in
which we operate and to conduct our business activities in an honest and ethical manner. Supply chain
(US$68,485,397,00024) management is one of our focus areas, and we have implemented the ‘Sony Supplier Code of Conduct’ for
suppliers working with Sony Group. We are working with the suppliers to address issues related to human
rights and labor conditions at the production sites, as well as in the procurement of minerals and other
Annual net profit: raw materials. Our policy and due diligence practices on responsible sourcing are described in our CSR
Yen -125,980,000,00025 for Report.”
fiscal year ended 31 March
2015 “As such, Sony has a strong commitment to ethical business conduct and we have a stringent policy and
management system to minimize the risk of child labor throughout our supply chain.
(US$-1.1 bn26)
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 81
Tianjin Lishen Battery Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
No response provided.
Joint-Stock Co., Ltd.
No.6 Lanyuan Road,
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Huayuan Hi-tech Industry Park,
Company denies being part of Huayou’s cobalt supply chain.
Tianjin, China
“Our current cathode materials supplier, Tianjin Bamo Technology Co., Ltd, has no business dealings
with Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt Co., Ltd. The cathode materials supplied to us by Toda Hunan Shanshan
Annual turnover:
New Material Co., Ltd hasn’t used raw materials from Huayou Cobalt…We have confirmed in writing with
CNY 2,484,651,80027 for year
our cathode materials suppliers that the cathode materials we currently use have no involvement in any
ended 31 December 2014
violation of human rights, labour rights and environmental protection.”
(US$400,319,00028)
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
“We have signed purchasing agreements with our main raw material suppliers. The agreements clearly
demand that the products supplied to us must comply with requirements concerning human rights, labour
Annual net profit:
rights and environmental protection.”
CNY -80,316,80029 for year
ended 31 December 2014
(US$-12,940,00030)
Vodafone Group plc Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
Vodafone House Company is “unaware as to whether or not cobalt in our products originates in Katanga in the DRC.”
The Connection
Newbury Details:
Berkshire “Vodafone does not directly purchase raw minerals, ores or metals and we do not manufacture electronic
RG14 2FN products. However, we do purchase electronic products from suppliers and, in some cases, have influence
over the manufacturing and design of products.”
Annual turnover: “Both the smelters and the mines from which metals such as cobalt are originally sourced are several
£42,227,000,00031 for year steps away from Vodafone in the supply chain.”
ended 31 March 2015
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
(US$65,816,769,00032) Company is “unaware as to whether…CDM and Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within our supply chains.”
Details:
Annual net profit: “We can confirm that…Tianjin Lishen Battery Joint Stock Company Ltd is not a direct supplier to
£5,917,000,00033 for year Vodafone and therefore we do not have a direct contractual relationship with them. For original design
ended 31 March 2015 manufacturers (ODM) which are branded Vodafone and where we have direct relationships, we do not
allow the use of Chinese battery suppliers and Tianjin Lishen Battery Joint Stock Company Ltd is not used
(US$9,222,484,00034) in our products. We are not aware if original equipment manufacturers (OEM), such as Apple, Samsung
which are named customers on Tianjin Lishen Battery Joint Stock Company Ltd website use cobalt from
these mines as we do not have influence over the design or manufacture.”
“We will make contact with all our direct suppliers who have a direct relationship with Tianjin Lishen
Battery Joint Stock Company to make them aware of the issues you have raised, ask for their response and
set out Vodafone’s expectations.”
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
Company states that the standards it demands of its suppliers are set out in its Code of Ethical
Purchasing which is based on international standards and which “strictly prohibits child labour.”
Company states that: “These standards are integrated right from the start of our engagement with
suppliers, in the initial qualification process. We then conduct regular site assessments to ensure
compliance and if suppliers consistently fail to meet our standards, we will not work with them. To target
improvements further down the supply chain, we work with our suppliers to implement similar standards
with their suppliers.” Company expects suppliers to “be able to source validated conflict-free minerals
from the DRC and we support industry initiatives such as the Conflict-Free Sourcing Initiative of which we
are a member.”
Company referenced its Conflict Minerals Policy Standard. It also provided its second Conflict Minerals
report, submitted in accordance with US reporting requirements, stating that it is “important to note that
cobalt is not one of the minerals which is included in the Conflict Minerals report and therefore [not]
subject to the same level of due diligence as the other minerals noted above [tantalum, tin, tungsten or
gold].”
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

82 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Volkswagen Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
Brieffach 1998 “To our best knowledge, the cobalt in our batteries does not originate from the DRC.”
D-38436 Wolfsburg
Germany Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
“To our best knowledge CDM or Huayou Cobalt is not part of our supply chain.”
Annual turnover: Company confirmed that after analysing its business relationships, it did not have an “active” relationship
€202,458,000,00035 for year with BAK, but it did with Tianjin Lishen. “We contacted our supplier regarding the use of cobalt in lithium
ended 31 December 2014 batteries and the respective supply chain. The supply chain you mapped out in your letter was refused by
our supplier.”
(US$245,181,352,00036)
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
“To our best knowledge we had no human rights abuses in our cobalt supply chains in the past.”
Annual net profit:
€11,068,000,00037 for year “Our supplier relations are based on the “Volkswagen Group requirements regarding sustainability
ended 31 December 2014 in its relationships with business partners (Code of Conduct for Business Partners)”, They formulate
our expectations for our business partners’ conduct with regard to central environmental and social
(US$13,403,606,00038) standards....Child labour is prohibited specifically.”
“In order to prevent human rights abuses caused by the mining of raw materials the Volkswagen Group
disclosed the “Volkswagen Conflict Mineral Policy” this year. Volkswagen along with other companies and
trade associations welcomes the proposition of improving transparency in the raw materials sector, which
is of great importance to the economic development of producing countries. Fair and non-discriminatory
access to raw materials is also required.”
“In general the Volkswagen Group uses an internal system for sustainable supply chain management. It
provides supplier-specific sustainability information, enabling the comprehensive analysis of suppliers.
If there is reason to suspect that tier 1 suppliers or their sub-suppliers are failing to comply with our
sustainability requirements, we ask the party concerned for a written statement using a standardized
report (6D Report). Based on the six points in the report, they can describe the status quo and any
remedial measures…If the answers prove unsatisfactory, we take further appropriate steps, such as the
examination of documents, visits to the supplier’s premises, 3rd party CSR audits or other customized
supplier development activities…If deviations are revealed, specific improvement measures are agreed
with such respective suppliers and followed up by the internal Sustainability in Supplier Relations
Network.”
“Human rights due diligence policies and practices are annually disclosed in the Volkswagen
Sustainability Report. In the Chapter “Supplier Management” Volkswagen informs the public about risk
management, sustainability requirement, qualification, monitoring and 3rd party CSR audits of suppliers.
Furthermore Volkswagen discloses ad-hoc cases distinguished between geographical distribution, context
and type of suppliers. In 2014 for example, 23 suppliers were not compliant with our social standards
and in two cases sub-suppliers were involved. Volkswagen also includes sustainability issues in the
Volkswagen Annual Report.” The company also provided its Internal Code of Conduct and “Sustainability
in Supplier Relations” brochure.
The following companies were contacted, but did not respond:
• ATL
• BAK
• BYD
• Dell
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 83
TABLE 2: Companies potentially buying from Tianjin Bamo as part of Huayou Cobalt’s supply chain
Company
Tianjin Bamo Science and Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
Technology Ltd. No response provided.
Tianjin Binhai High-tech
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Industrial Zone
Tianjin Bamo replied via two of its clients, Coslight and Tianjin Lishen, that it has had “no business
(outside the ring),
dealings” with Huayou Cobalt.
No. 8 Haitai Road
Tianjin Bamo states that it purchased lithium cobalt oxide from Jiangsu Cobalt Nickel Metal Co., Ltd and
Lanzhou Jinchuan Advanced Materials Technology Co., Ltd.
Annual turnover:
CNY 610,221,40039 as of year-
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
end 2013
Coslight stated that Tianjin Bamo has “signed letters of undertaking with its upstream suppliers
prohibiting the use of conflict minerals and obliging them to protect human rights, labour rights and the
(US$100,797,00040)
environment.”
Annual net profit:
CNY 22,108,90041 as of year-
end 2013
(US$3,652,00042)
Coslight Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
No. 68, Dianlan Street, No response provided.
Xuefu Road,
Nangang District, Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Harbin, Coslight replied via its client Huawei, and declared that “the products supplied to Huawei don’t contain
China any conflict minerals or involve in any human rights abuse.”
Company confirmed that its raw materials are supplied by Tianjin Bamo, but that an investigation shows
Annual turnover: that Tianjin Bamo have had “no business dealings” with Huayou Cobalt. The investigation also “verified
CNY 3,530,664,00043 for year and confirmed with existing secondary suppliers that there are no issues of the violation of human rights
ended 31 December 2014 and labour rights as well as environment protection with the currently used lithium cobalt oxide.”
(US$568,850,00044) Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
Coslight has “signed an agreement with Tianjin Bamo Technology Co., Ltd strictly prohibiting the use of
(N.B.: Li-ion batteries account conflict minerals.”
for 52.8% of revenues)
Annual net profit:
CNY 28,333,00045 for year
ended 31 December 2014
(US$4,565,00046)
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

84 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Inventec Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
(owner of mobile phone No response provided.
manufacturer OKWAP)
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Inventec Appliances Company “has learned internally that OKWAP hasn’t purchased from Coslight Technology International
No.66, Hougang St., Group.”
Shilin Dist.,
Taipei City 11170, Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
Taiwan “In the procurement contracts for electronic components, we clearly demand suppliers in all regions to
pledge to fully comply with all local laws and regulations; and guarantee that employees’ health and work
safety fully complies with local governments’ relevant regulations. We also ask them to promise not to use
Annual turnover: child labour and forced labour, and treat their labour:
TWD 435,599,968,00047 for (1) in accordance with the provisions of the International Labour Organisation;
year ended 31 December 2014 (2) without any discriminatory rules and regimes concerning labour rights; and
(3) in compliance with local laws regarding pay schemes and arrangements of working hours.”
(US$13,779,992,00048)
“We have asked the suppliers to sign and comply with the Code of Ethics for Inventec’s Suppliers (Code
of Ethics). This Code of Ethics has been developed in accordance with the Universal Declaration of
Annual net profit: Human Rights, International Labour Organisation Conventions, EICC Electronic Industry Code of Conduct,
TWD 6,665,561,00049 for year and other human rights and labour rights provisions and their spirits. Inventec expects suppliers to strictly
ended 31 December 2014 comply with this Code of Ethics, especially the provisions prohibiting child labour and forced labour.”
(US$210,862,00050)
For responses by Huawei, and Tianjin Lishen and its potential buyers, see table 1.
The following companies were contacted, but did not respond:
• Ahong
• ZTE
• BYD
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 85
TABLE 3: Companies potentially buying from L & F Materials as part of Huayou Cobalt’s supply chain
Company
LG Chem Ltd Does cobalt in the company’s products originate in the DRC?
Company confirmed that cobalt from Katanga is in its product.
LG Twin Towers,128,
Yeoui-daero, Yeongdeungpo-gu,
Company stated that “We requested our suppliers of cathode materials to confirm whether they used
Seoul
cobalt originating in Katanga in the DRC, and one of our 2nd-teir suppliers, Zheijiang Huayou Cobalt Co.,
Ltd. (“Huayou Cobalt”), has confirmed that their product contains cobalt originating in Katanga in the DRC.”
Annual turnover: “We are discussing whether there is a need for us to conduct our own inspection on the cobalt mining
Korean Won areas in Katanga, together with a 3rd-party inspector. If the risk of human rights violations is confirmed
22,577,830,000,00051 for year to be very high and serious through the inspection, we will consider taking a wide range of effective
ended 31 December 2014 actions to stop the violations, such as suspending or terminating business with those suppliers who
procure cobalt from such mines.”
(US$20,675,244,00052)
Do CDM or Huayou Cobalt process cobalt within the company’s supply chain?
Company confirmed that Huayou Cobalt is one of its suppliers of cobalt products.
Annual net profit: Details:
Korean Won “Huayou Cobalt which supplies cobalt oxide to one of our cathode materials suppliers, L&F Materials,
854,025,000,00053 for year purchases cobalt concentrate and crude cobalt hydroxide from CDM.”
ended 31 December 2014
(U $782,058,00054) LG Chem asked L&F Materials to “contact Huayou Cobalt and confirm the facts and let them know the
steps they are taking to prevent further problems.” The company provided Huayou Cobalt‘s response.
Details of the company’s human rights policies and due diligence measures:
“LG Chem is actively participating in the global initiative on prohibiting the use of conflict minerals
(3TG)… We have two policies in place to control the components of our products … the Guideline for
the Eco-Friendly SCM which presents to our suppliers the requirements on composition of materials
and products supplied to LG Chem. The conflict minerals have been added to the list of Prohibited
Substances in the Policy and Guideline since 2013.”
“In order to make sure that our suppliers comply with our policy, LG Chem has established a process to
control the composition of materials from the procurement stage. Every supplier of materials is required
to fill out and submit the composition survey form to confirm whether their product contains any of the
prohibited ingredients including conflict minerals. If there exists one, LG Chem requires the supplier to
provide the smelter information and a confirmation to guarantee that the mineral is sourced from one of the
CFS (Conflict-Free Smelters). Purchase orders cannot be placed without going through this process…”
“We will continue to monitor and update our policy on the use of minerals and take actions to restrict
or prohibit the use of those which are legally restricted in any parts of the world and confirmed to cause
severe damage to social values such as human rights. The use of such minerals in their supply chain will
be identified and strictly managed from the procurement stage just like how the conflict minerals are
currently being managed.”
“We have been drafting a Supplier Code of Conduct as a way of encouraging and requiring their suppliers
to meet the global standards on the comprehensive social responsibility. The Code, effective starting from
2016, specifically includes a provision on prohibiting the use of materials which have been obtained by
illegal or unethical measures and requires the suppliers to perform due diligence practices to guarantee
that they are compliant with the Code if necessary. Such requirements must also be demanded of their
own suppliers so that all our upstream suppliers are managed under the same standards.”
“We currently only publicly disclose our approach on prohibiting the use of conflict minerals on our
website and Sustainability Report. As we are in the course of establishing a system to evaluate our
suppliers on their CSR management status, we will disclose the process and results of the evaluation on
the Sustainability Report once the system has been set in place.”
The company also provided the following documents: Eco-friendly Product Development Policy; Guideline
for Eco-Friendly SCM; LG4 Conflict Mineral Committee; Guarantees from Suppliers; ERP System for
Substance Management; Supplier Training Material.
For responses by Apple, Samsung SDI, Samsung Electronics, see table 1.
The following companies were contacted, but did not respond:
• L&F Material
• LG (provided answer through LG Chem)
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

86 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
Endnotes
1. Apple Inc., Form 10-K 2015, Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 26 September 2015, p. 39,
available at http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/AAPL/1302159207x0x861262/2601797E-6590-4CAA-86C9-962348440FFC/2015_Form_10-K_
As-filed_.pdf (accessed on 7 January 2016)
2. Ibid., p. 40
3. Daimler AG, Annual Financial Report 2014, p. 192, available at https://www.daimler.com/documents/investors/berichte/geschaeftsberichte/daimler/
daimler-ir-annualfinancialreport-2014.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
4. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=EUR&date=2016-01-11 (accessed
11 January 2016)
5. Daimler AG, Annual Financial Report 2014, p. 192, available at https://www.daimler.com/documents/investors/berichte/geschaeftsberichte/daimler/
daimler-ir-annualfinancialreport-2014.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
6. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=EUR&date=2016-01-11 (accessed
11 January 2016)
7. HP Inc, Form 10-K, Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, for period up to 31 October 2015, p. 89
available at http://h30261.www3.hp.com/~/media/Files/H/HP-IR/documents/reports/2016/2015-form-10k.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
8. Ibid, p. 90
9. Huawei Investment and Holding Co., Ltd, Annual Report 2014, p. 12, available at http://www-file.huawei.com/~/media/CORPORATE/PDF/annual-report/
huawei_annual_report_2014_en.pdf?la=en (accessed 7 January 2016)
10. Ibid
11. Lenovo, Financial Information, available at http://www.lenovo.com/ww/lenovo/financial_information.html (accessed 7 January 2015)
12. Ibid.
13. Microsoft Corporation, Form 10-K, Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, for the fiscal year ended 30
June 2015, p. 25 and 47
14. Ibid.
15. Samsung Electronics Annual Report 2014, p. 41 available at http://www.samsung.com/common/aboutsamsung/download/companyreports/2014_E.pdf
(accessed 7 January 2016)
16. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=KRW&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
17. Samsung SDI CO., Ltd and Subsidiaries, Consolidated Financial Statements December 31, 2014 and 2013, p. 4, available at file://intsec.amnesty.org/
data/users/larmiste/Downloads/201407_IFRS_Final.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
18. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=KRW&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
19. Samsung SDI CO., Ltd and Subsidiaries, Consolidated Financial Statements December 31, 2014 and 2013, p. 4, available at file://intsec.amnesty.org/
data/users/larmiste/Downloads/201407_IFRS_Final.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
20. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=KRW&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
21. Samsung SDI CO., Ltd and Subsidiaries, Consolidated Financial Statements December 31, 2014 and 2013, p. 4, available at file://intsec.amnesty.org/
data/users/larmiste/Downloads/201407_IFRS_Final.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
22. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=KRW&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
23. Sony, Consolidated Financial Statements for the Fiscal Year ended 31, March 2015, p. 6, available at http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/IR/stock/sharehold-
ers_meeting/Meeting98/98_Consolidated_Financial_Statements.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
24. According to historic exchange rates on 31 March 2015 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=JPY&date=2015-03-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
25. Sony, Consolidated Financial Statements for the Fiscal Year ended 31, March 2015, p. 8, available at http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/IR/stock/sharehold-
ers_meeting/Meeting98/98_Consolidated_Financial_Statements.pdf (accessed 7 January 2016)
26. According to historic exchange rates on 31 March 2015 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=JPY&date=2015-03-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
27. Anhui Xinke New Materials Co., Ltd., 2014 Annual report, p. 19, available at: http://www.cninfo.com.cn/finalpage/2015-04-11/1200812431.PD-
F#page=19
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 87
28. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=CNY&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
29. Anhui Xinke New Materials Co., Ltd., 2014 Annual report, p. 19, available at: http://www.cninfo.com.cn/finalpage/2015-04-11/1200812431.PD-
F#page=19
30. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=CNY&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
31. Vodafone Group Plc. Annual Report 2015, p. 105, available at http://www.vodafone.com/content/annualreport/annualreport15/assets/pdf/full_annu-
al_report_2015.pdf, (accessed 7 January 2016)
32. According to historic exchange rates on 31 March 2015 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=GBP&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 11
January 2016)
33. Vodafone Group Plc. Annual Report 2015, p. 105, available at http://www.vodafone.com/content/annualreport/annualreport15/assets/pdf/full_annu-
al_report_2015.pdf, (accessed 7 January 2016)
34. According to historic exchange rates on 31 March 2015 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=GBP&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 11
January 2016)
35. Volkswagen, Income Statement of the Volkswagen Group for the Period January 1 to December 31, 2014, available at http://annualreport2014.volkswa-
genag.com/consolidated-financial-statements/income-statement.html (accessed 7 January 2016)
36. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=EUR&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
37. Volkswagen, Income Statement of the Volkswagen Group for the Period January 1 to December 31, 2014, available at http://annualreport2014.volkswa-
genag.com/consolidated-financial-statements/income-statement.html (accessed 7 January 2016)
38. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=EUR&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
39. Fujian Zhonghe Co., Ltd., Announcement of Purchase of Shares of Tianjin Bamo Science and Technology Co., Ltd., p. 3, available at: http://www.
cninfo.com.cn/finalpage/2014-12-01/1200426359.PDF#page=3
40. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=CNY&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
41. Fujian Zhonghe Co., Ltd., Announcement of Purchase of Shares of Tianjin Bamo Science and Technology Co., Ltd., p. 3, available at: http://www.
cninfo.com.cn/finalpage/2014-12-01/1200426359.PDF#page=3
42. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=CNY&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
43. Coslight: Technology International Group Ltd. 2014 Annual Report, p.30 (info on percentage of Li-ion is on p. 89), available at: http://www.hkexnews.
hk/listedco/listconews/SEHK/2015/0430/LTN20150430168.pdf#page=31
44. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=CNY&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
45. Coslight: Technology International Group Ltd. 2014 Annual Report, p.30 (info on percentage of Li-ion is on p. 89), available at: http://www.hkexnews.
hk/listedco/listconews/SEHK/2015/0430/LTN20150430168.pdf#page=31
46. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=CNY&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
47. Inventec Corporation and its Subsidiaries: Consolidate Financial Statements, December 31, 2014 and 2013, p. 6, available at: http://www.inventec.
com/english/service/pdf/103Q4E.pdf#page=7
48. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=TWD&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
49. Inventec Corporation and its Subsidiaries: Consolidate Financial Statements, December 31, 2014 and 2013, p. 6, available at:http://www.inventec.
com/english/service/pdf/103Q4E.pdf#page=7
50. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=TWD&date=2014-12-31 (accessed
11 January 2016)
51. LG Chem, Annual Report 2014, p. 20, available at http://www.lgchem.com/upload/file/annual-report/2014_LGChem_AR[0].PDF (accessed 7 January 2016)
52. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=KRW&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
53. LG Chem, Annual Report 2014, p. 20, available at http://www.lgchem.com/upload/file/annual-report/2014_LGChem_AR[0].PDF (accessed 7 January 2016)
54. According to historic exchange rates on 31 December 2014 available at http://www.xe.com/currencytables/?from=KRW&date=2014-12-31 (accessed 7
January 2016)
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

88 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT 89
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

90 “THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”: HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL TRADE IN COBALT
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL JANUARY 2016, INDEX: AFR 62/3183/2016

AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
IS A GLOBAL MOVEMENT
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS.
WHEN INJUSTICE HAPPENS
TO ONE PERSON, IT
MATTERS TO US ALL
CONTACT US JOIN THE CONVERSATION
info@amnesty.org www.facebook.com/AmnestyGlobal
+44 (0)20 7413 5500 @AmnestyOnline

“THIS IS WHAT WE DIE FOR”
HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO POWER THE GLOBAL
TRADE IN COBALT
People around the world increasingly rely on rechargeable batteries to power their mobile phones, tablets,
laptop computers, cameras and other portable electronic devices. Cobalt is a key component in lithium-ion
rechargeable batteries. This report documents the hazardous conditions in which artisanal miners mine cobalt
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), where more than half of the world’s total supply of cobalt
comes from.
Using basic hand tools, artisanal miners dig out rocks from tunnels deep underground, and accidents are
common. Many children are involved in artisanal mining. Despite the serious and potentially fatal health
effects of prolonged exposure to cobalt, adult and child miners work with cobalt for long periods without even
the most basic protective equipment.
This report is the first comprehensive account of how cobalt from the DRC’s artisanal mines enters the supply
chain of many of the world’s leading brands. It highlights the failure of these companies to put in place due
diligence measures to identify where the cobalt in their products comes from and the conditions in which it is
extracted and traded.
The government of the DRC must extend and enforce labour and safety protections for all artisanal miners
and create more authorized artisanal mining areas. The government, along with companies involved, should
ensure that children are removed from hazardous working conditions and address the children’s educational
and other needs. All governments should enact and enforce laws requiring corporate due diligence and public
disclosure in relation to cobalt and other minerals.
Index: AFR 62/3183/2016
January 2016
amnesty.org