The EU Conflict Minerals Regulation
High Stakes, Disappointing Results
Paper on the effectiveness of European Union Regulation 2017/821
International Peace
Information Service
1

EDITORIAL
The EU Conflict Minerals Regulation: High Stakes, Disappointing Results
Antwerp / Goma / Utrecht, October 2023
Front cover image: Furnace in a gold smelter. © Adobestock
Authors: Lotte Hoex, Jean-Sébastien Sépulchre, Marianne Moor
Suggested citation: IPIS, PAX, The EU Conflict Minerals Regulation: High Stakes, Disappointing Results.
Antwerp / Goma / Utrecht, October 2023.
For more information, please contact: lotte.hoex@ipisresearch.be
D/2023/4320/16
International Peace Information Service (IPIS) is an independent research institute providing tailored
information, analysis, capacity enhancement and policy advice to support those actors who want to
realize a vision of durable peace, sustainable development and the fulfilment of human rights.
PAX means peace. Together with people in conflict areas and concerned citizens worldwide, PAX works
to build just and peaceful societies across the globe. PAX brings together people who have the courage to
stand for peace. Everyone who believes in peace can contribute. We believe that all these steps, whether
sma ll or large, truly matter and will contribute to a just and peaceful world.
DISCLAIMER
This document has been produced with the financial assistance of the European Union and the Dutch Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. The contents of the document are the sole responsibility of IPIS and PAX and can under no
circumstances be regarded as reflecting the position of the European Union nor the Dutch Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
2 3

1. TABLE OF CONTENTS
EDITORIAL ...........................................................................................................................................2
ABBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................................................4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................5
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................7
1. THE INEXTRICABLE LINK BETWEEN DUE DILIGENCE AND TRANSPARENCY ...........................9
The bottleneck of refiners and smelters .....................................................................................................................9
Management system obligations under the Regulation ....................................................................................10
Illustrations of gold trading hubs ...............................................................................................................................11
The role of due diligence schemes in the Regulation ..........................................................................................13
Disclosure obligations for importers and sub-standard reporting issues .....................................................16
Transparency at the member state level ...................................................................................................................16
Transparency on EU import data .................................................................................................................................17
2. CAN THE EU REGULATION AVOID DISENGAGEMENT? .............................................................18
CAHRA list ...........................................................................................................................................................................20
Inclusive focus ...................................................................................................................................................................22
Accompanying measures ..............................................................................................................................................23
RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................................................24
2 3

ABBREVIATIONS
3TG Tin, Tungsten, Tantalum and Gold
ASM Artisanal and Small-scale Mining
CAHRAs Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
CRMs Critical Raw Materials
CSDDD Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive
CSOs Civil Society Organization
EC European Commission
EEAS European External Action Service
ESG risks Environmental, Social and Governance risks
EU Regulation EU Regulation 2017/821 Supply chain due diligence for minerals from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas
EU European Union
LBMA London Bullion Market Association
LSM Large-Scale Mining
MSCAs Member States’ Competent Authorities
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
RMAP Responsible Minerals Assurance Process
RMI Responsible Minerals Initiative
RSF Rapid Support Forces
SAF Sudan Armed Forces
UAE United Arab Emirates
US DFA United States Dodd Frank Act
4 5

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The EU Regulation on the responsible supply of tin, tungsten, tantalum and gold (3TG) originating from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas (CAHRAs) came into full force on 1 January 2021. Also known as the
“Conflict Minerals” or “Responsible Minerals” Regulation, it aims to break the link between the exploitation
and trade in 3TG on the one hand, and conflict financing on the other hand. The law also aims to support
the development of local communities.
The Regulation is largely based on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's
(OECD) Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from CAHRAs, the leading
norm for responsible mineral sourcing. Its innovation lies in the fact that the Regulation makes the
otherwise voluntary Guidance mandatory for EU importers. While the Regulation focuses on the 3Ts and
gold originating from CAHRAs, it has broader due diligence implications for EU imports from any origin in
the world. It aims to have an impact not only on EU importers but also further up the supply chain, from
the EU companies’ direct suppliers up to the mines of mineral origin.
The law stipulates that by 2023 and every three years thereafter, the European Commission (EC)
should review its functioning and effectiveness. Within this context, the EC contracted a consortium of
consultants to conduct an evaluation that will contribute to the 2023 review. In anticipation of the formal
EC review, this briefing paper seeks to evaluate how the Regulation has actually played out and what
the main obstacles to its effective implementation have been so far. The paper is based on an analysis
of documents and interviews with stakeholders, including regulators, industry representatives, and civil
society.
Disappointingly, more than six years after the Regulation was signed into law, and almost three years
after the requirements for EU importers started applying, our overall assessment is that the Regulation
has not achieved any notable impact along supply chains, let alone in producing countries. At the same
time, the illegal trade of minerals, in particular gold, continues to play an important role in financing
certain conflicts, alongside other revenue streams.
The lack of impact can be explained at several levels. Firstly, Member States’ Competent Authorities
(MSCAs), which are responsible for ensuring the “effective and uniform” implementation of the Regulation,
often lack the necessary sector expertise and capacity to fulfill their task. Moreover, differences between
the interpretation by MSCAs of the Regulation have resulted in an uneven implementation across
Member States.
Secondly, many EU importers of 3TG have not (yet) sufficiently complied with the Regulation’s
requirements. MSCAs indicated for example that the Union importers’ reporting is often not up to
standard. EU importers often fail to operate adequate and complete supply chain traceability systems,
and to disclose relevant information, which has prevented transparency to increase. Most Union importers
source from smelters and refiners outside the EU which, in their turn, are often not fully transparent on
mineral origin. Because the mine of mineral origin is often not known to Union importers, we fear that EU
obligations rarely cascade to suppliers up to the level of producing countries.
This also means that heightened due diligence in the case of CAHRAs or artisanal and small-scale mining
(ASM) has not been applied to date. Consequently, the Regulation does not seem to have caused a
noticeable disengagement from CAHRAs/ASM. This can however, not be attributed to positive effects of
the EU law.
A decade of due diligence implementation has taught us that the tension between avoiding any human
rights abuse in the supply chain on the one hand, and continuing engagement in CAHRAs/ASM on the
other hand, cannot be solved by markets alone. Sourcing outside CAHRAs and excluding ASM is currently
a low-cost and a low-risk business decision, whereas remaining engaged in CAHRAs/ASM often entails
(additional) due diligence, audit, and organizational costs.
4 5

If the EU wishes to contribute to an improved human rights situation in producing countries, including
in CAHRAs, it has to actively intervene, both by encouraging downstream companies to engage in
CAHRAs/ ASM through supporting progressive improvement, and by supporting upstream producers to
progressively meet the EU standards. This progressive approach, that accepts imperfection, could at the
same time stimulate more transparency.
In order to improve transparency, we argue that the EU should make it mandatory for Union importers
to trace their imports back to the mine(s) of origin, in all cases. The EU should also widen the scope of the
information that EU importers should disclose to the public. More transparency will help journalists and
non-governmental organizations perform their vital role as watchdogs, and also help build confidence
among the public.
The EU should equip the EC with more capacity to play a leading role in the Regulation’s implementation,
which should reinforce the work of MSCAs. Authorities should avoid overreliance on industry-led schemes
and third-party audits, no matter how good these are, but instead use them as a useful tool among
others, such as information obtained from non-governmental organizations, journalists, and affected
communities themselves.
Finally, the EU should make better use of its political and economic leverage in order to strengthen its
collaboration with 3TG producing countries. Sourcing more directly from CAHRAS and the ASM sector
allows to shorten the supply chain and better promote practices that respect both the local communities
– including artisanal miners’ livelihoods – and the environment. Without these improvements, the
Regulation will remain a purely technical exercise without any impacts for communities in producing
countries.
6 7

INTRODUCTION
The European Union’s Conflict Minerals Regulation 2017/821 (in short EU Regulation) was signed
into law in June 2017 and came into full force on 1 January 2021.1 The EU Regulation requires Union
importers of tin, tantalum and tungsten, their ores, and gold to source responsibly. Also referred to as the
“Responsible Minerals Regulation,” this legislation aims to “help break the link” between conflict and the
illegal exploitation of and trade in minerals and to “help put an end to the exploitation and abuse of local
communities, including mine workers, and support local development.”2
The Regulation is based on the leading international standard for responsible mineral sourcing: the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's (OECD) Due Diligence Guidance for
Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas (hereafter the OECD
Guidance).3 The innovation lies in the fact that the Regulation makes the otherwise voluntary Guidance
mandatory for EU importers. While the Regulation focuses on the 3Ts and gold (“3TG”) originating from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas (CAHRAs), its concrete implementation requires due diligence
measures for EU imports from any origin in the world.
The inclusion of the OECD Guidelines was supported by many European civil society organizations that
had been advocating for mandatory due diligence measures for EU importers of minerals. Nevertheless,
European NGOs had objections to certain elements of the Regulation. The European NGO Coalition on
Conflict Minerals published a series of briefings over the years that highlighted several shortcomings.4
Among the main concerns is the limited mineral scope of the Regulation (only 3TG). Secondly, the
Regulation does not apply to the import of manufactured goods, despite high risks in their supply chains:
raw materials are rather trivial in EU trade flows with non-EU countries. The vast majority of products that
contain 3TG minerals and that are consumed in the EU, are derived from imports of already manufactured
goods.5 Thirdly, the volume thresholds of metals and minerals triggering the application of the EU law,
allows millions of euros worth of materials, including from CAHRAs, to enter the EU without due diligence
checks. Furthermore, the NGO coalition advocated for transparency as a fundamental requirement for
effective due diligence, this included the public disclosure of the names of Union importers. Finally, it also
cautioned against an overreliance on industry schemes and third-party audits.6
That being said, the Regulation as a mandatory instrument was welcomed for its potential to pressure
economic operators from one of the globe’s main trading blocs to source responsibly. By doing so, the
EU could provide its importers with the leverage needed to enforce changes along the supply chain, and,
ultimately, at the production level.7
Almost three years have passed since the requirements for EU importers started applying. The law
stipulates that by the 1st of January 2023 and every three years thereafter, the European Commission (EC)
should review its functioning and effectiveness. Within this context, the EC has contracted a consortium
1 Regulation (EU) 2017/821 of the European Parliament and the European Council of 17 May 2017 laying down supply chain due
diligence obligations for Union importers of tin, tantalum and tungsten, their ores, and gold originating from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas.
2 European Commission, Conflict Minerals Regulation: the regulation explained.
3 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Due Diligence Guidance on Responsible Mineral Supply
Chains from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas, Version 3, 2016.
4 See previous publications from 2016, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
5 IPIS, Regulating responsible sourcing of 3TG minerals, in IPIS Insights on Due Diligence on Mineral Sourcing, IPIS, December 2019
6 Eurac, Accompanying Measures to the EU Regulation on Responsible Mineral Sourcing. Towards an improved governance of the
artisanal mining sector in the DRC, March 2017; The EU Conflict Minerals Regulation. Implementation at the EU Member State
level. Review paper, June 2021; European NGO Coalition on Conflict Minerals, Ensuring transparency in the implementation of the
European Union’s Regulation on the supply of 3TG minerals. Joint Policy Note, 2 March 2020.
7 For example, Germany was the leading EU importer of refined tin in 2021, and fourth in the global ranking of user countries.
Bundesanstalt fuer Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe; Deutschland-Rohstofsituation 2021; December 2022, page 52.
6 7

of consultants to conduct an evaluation that will contribute to the final 2023 review report.8 At the time
of writing, this report has not yet been published.9
In anticipation of the formal EC review, this paper seeks to highlight the shortcomings of the legislation
and its implementation that are impeding its effectiveness. Furthermore, this paper takes into account
the various due diligence bills that are currently being developed by the EU and its Member States.
We are of the opinion that the experiences and insights gained during the implementation of the 3TG
Regulation can enrich the democratic debate on impending legislation with substantive arguments. At
the same time, innovations in new laws and proposals can also positively influence the future of the
EU 3TG Regulation, including amendments to the Regulation or improvements in its implementation
practices.10 Such innovations for example relate to the inclusion of environmental risks (as in the EU
Battery Regulation11 and the Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive12 – CSDDD).
Because of the objectives explained above, this paper will primarily focus on the general effectiveness of
the Regulation, rather than on the technical shortcomings of the implementation process. An additional
reason for this, is that many technical details of the Regulation's implementation are gradually being
leveled out thanks to consultations between the 27 Member States Competent Authorities (MSCAs) and
the EC. In summary, it is more expedient at this point in time to evaluate how the Regulation has actually
played out, whether the original key objectives have been met, and how they can be achieved within the
foreseeable future.
This briefing paper builds on a discussion paper for which interviews were conducted with ten MSCAs
between December 2022 and March 2023. We also held interviews with representatives of the EC, industry
representatives, sector experts, and national authorities representing the Ministry of Mines of 15 African
3TG-producing countries. The discussion paper was presented at the OECD Minerals Forum in Paris in
April 2023 in a dedicated partner session and we shared it with a wide range of stakeholders representing
the EC, MSCAs, industry, and civil society, requesting feedback on our findings. This feedback has been
incorporated in this paper.
Chapter 1 identifies challenges around supply chain transparency and reporting; chapter 2 discusses
the Regulation’s possible consequences for CAHRAs and artisanal miners. Finally, we formulate
recommendations to improve the Regulation’s impact, some of which are also relevant with regards to
the broader EU due diligence landscape.
8 Call for tenders TRADE/2022/OP/0001, 23-3-2022, Study to review the functioning and effectiveness of Regulation (EU) 2017/821
(due diligence obligations for importers of tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold from conflict-affected and high-risk areas). The
EC granted the study to a Consortium led by B&S Europe in partnership with TDi Sustainability and the Responsible Sourcing
Network.
9 Early October 2023.
10 On the broader EU regulatory initiatives related to business and human rights, see DIHR, How do the pieces fit in the puzzle?
Making sense of EU regulatory initiatives related to business and human rights, August 2023.
11 Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning batteries and waste batteries, amending Directive 2008/98/
EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and repealing Directive 2006/66/EC.
12 Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence and amending
Directive (EU) 2019/1937.
8 9

1. THE INEXTRICABLE LINK BETWEEN DUE
DILIGENCE AND TRANSPARENCY
Transparency is a key objective of the Regulation. The text states that the Regulation is “designed to provide
transparency and certainty as regards the supply practices of Union importers, and of smelters and refiners
sourcing” from CAHRAs.13 It further notes the importance of public reporting by economic operators,
which “provides the necessary transparency to generate public confidence in the measures economic operators
are taking.”14
Union importers of minerals and metals have to incorporate and implement the five-step framework of
the OECD Guidance.15 When downstream actors identify risks of adverse impacts, they should mitigate
those risks through their leverage over suppliers and, if necessary, impose corrective action. The crux
of the matter here is how much downstream companies actually get to know about adverse impacts
further upstream. In practice, this depends on their efforts and capacity to acquire sufficient information
from their supplier.
This chapter analyses the role of refiners, smelters and industry schemes in assuring transparency along
the entire supply chain. It also provides analysis on the level of transparency in implementing the EU
Regulation at Member State and European Union level.
The bottleneck of refiners and smelters
Importers of 3TG metals to a large extent rely on refiners and smelters disclosing essential information,
such as the country of origin and names of the mines from which they source. The majority of smelters
and refiners are located outside the EU. Most of them are located in a limited number of so-called trading
hubs where the minerals and metals are transformed by either refiners (in the case of gold) or smelters
(in the case of the 3Ts) before they are exported.16
The level of transparency of smelters and refiners is crucial. Not only are they the last link in the supply
chain where it is still technically feasible to trace back the origin of minerals, but they also have (the
potential) leverage to ensure responsible practices in producer countries. This explains why they are
referred to as “choke points” in the supply chain. Smelters and refiners can disclose the information vital
for due diligence by including it in third-party audit reporting or by supplying separate records. However,
information on the country of origin, let alone the names of the mines of origin, is often not disclosed,
meaning that in practice the level of transparency of smelters and refiners usually is insufficient.
For example, research published in March 2023 by the NGO SWISSAID on African gold supply chains
documented that the majority of gold refineries were not willing to disclose information on their sourcing
practices. This seems to be a matter of deliberate choice rather than an obligation imposed by mining
companies. Seemingly, it is not that such disclosure would affect their competitive position, as some of
the information is already out in the public domain. It rather appears that refiners often do not disclose
their business relationships to avoid being associated with human rights abuses or other problems
related to the exploitation of minerals.17 In September 2023, all 33 members of the World Gold Council
– the umbrella organization representing the majority of the global large-scale gold mining industry –
committed to publishing the names and locations of their partner refineries on at least an annual basis.18
13 Article 1 (1) of Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
14 Recital 13 of Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
15 See articles 4 and 5 of Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
16 In the case of the 3Ts, the most important hub trading with the EU is China, while the primary trading hub for gold is Switzerland.
17 See SWISSAID, Out of the Shadows. Business Relationships between Industrial Gold Mines in Africa and Refineries, March 2023.
18 World Gold Council, World Gold Council members commit to enhanced supply-chain transparency, 18 September 2023.
8 9

SwissAid hailed this step as a “breakthrough in transparency in the gold sector”, stating that it “increases
the responsibility of the various players and contributes to better practices.” The World Gold Council’s
decision might help convince more refineries, and possibly also smelters to become more transparent
about their sourcing practices.19
The EU Regulation sought to address the insufficient level of transparency of smelters and refiners by
making the disclosure of sourcing practices mandatory for EU imports, even if just part of them need to
be disclosed publicly.
Management system obligations under the Regulation
It is the individual responsibility of each Union importer to assess the due diligence practices of its
suppliers and to cascade due diligence responsibility up the supply chain. Companies are required to
put in place a supply chain traceability system, defined in the Regulation as “a record of the sequence of
economic operators which have custody of minerals and metals as they move through a supply chain.”20
The Regulation distinguishes between the import of minerals and the import of metals, i.e., processed
minerals. The traceability obligations for importers of unprocessed or concentrated minerals are far-
reaching as they require to operate a chain of custody that provides information on the country of origin
of the minerals. In case of identified supply chain risks, additional information needs to be provided,
such as the mine of mineral origin, locations where minerals are consolidated, traded and processed, and
taxes, fees and royalties paid.21
The majority of 3TG minerals22 however enters the EU as a metal. The EU importers of these metals
are required to provide records of third-party audit reports of the smelters and refiners, or evidence
of conformity with an industry scheme that is recognized by the EC. If neither is the case, the importer
has the obligation to provide information on the countries of origin of sourced minerals, which means
that the smelters and refiners have to disclose this information to the importer. Where metals are based
on minerals originating from CAHRAs, or other supply risks have been ascertained, the Regulation also
requires the importer to provide “additional information in accordance with the specific recommendations
for downstream economic operators” set out in the OECD Guidance.23
Interestingly, the newly adopted EU Regulation on Batteries and Waste Batteries24 does not make the
distinction between minerals and metals, and instead uses the broader term “raw materials”. Article 49
of the said Regulation stipulates the obligation, from 18 August 2025 onwards, to provide information in
all cases on the raw material’s country of origin, and on the market transactions from its extraction down
to the immediate supplier of the economic operator. The onus falls on the “economic operators that place
batteries on the market or put them into service.”25 This constitutes an important development meriting
consideration in the 3TG Regulation’s evaluation process.
19 SWISSAID, SWISSAID report provides more transparency in the gold sector, 2 October 2023.
20 Article 2 (e) of Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
21 Article 4 (f)(v) of Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
22 The Regulation excludes 3TG minerals which come in manufactured goods, which is by far the majority of 3TG minerals that are
imported into the EU.
23 See Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
24 Council of the EU, Council adopts new regulation on batteries and waste batteries, 10 July 2023.
25 See Article 48 of Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2023 concerning batteries
and waste batteries, amending Directive 2008/98/EC and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 and repealing Directive 2006/66/EC.
10 11

Box 1 - Dubai’s role in trading gold from Sudan
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is home to many gold refiners and is one of the world’s main
gold trading hubs. Between 2016 and 2021, trade data shows that it imported about 750 tonnes
of refined gold per year on average. It is a major exporter of bullion and jewelry.26 In 2021, the
UAE was the world’s second exporter of gold.27 The UAE is an infamous conflict gold transit
hub and has been added to international watchlists. These lists include the Financial Action
Task Force’s grey list28 and EU’s own list of high-risk third countries with strategic deficiencies
in their policies related to money laundering and the financing of terrorism.29 The number one
destination for UAE gold is Switzerland, which is the EU’s most important gold trading partner
(see box 2). The UAE imports gold from many CAHRAs, including Sudan.
Since the start of Sudan’s “gold boom” in 2009, artisanal miners produce more than 80% of
the country’s gold30 while private companies – sometimes owned by armed actors – process
artisanal gold tailings. Many gold sites are controlled by armed actors. These include the Sudan
Armed Forces (SAF) and the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), which have been fighting each other
since April 2023.31 Competition over natural resources and trade networks is a major driver in
this conflict, which has caused tremendous harm to civilians throughout the country. Political
actors and gold traders engage in corrupt practices for personal gains, while the legal and
regulatory frameworks governing the gold sector remain poorly implemented. Gold mining
and tailings reprocessing in Sudan are also characterized by the unregulated use of hazardous
chemicals, like mercury and cyanide, which affects the environment and human health.32
Nearly half of Sudan’s gold is estimated to be smuggled out of the country, depriving the state
of critical revenue.33 Security sector companies, with ties to the RSF and SAF, are key actors
behind this smuggling.34 The vast majority of Sudan’s gold ends up in the UAE through official
trade35 and smuggling. Afterwards, the UAE’s weak regulatory and anti-money laundering
controls allow Sudanese gold to reach global markets.
For example, Switzerland’s largest gold refiner Valcambi has recently been accused of buying
‘dirty’ gold from UAE-based Kaloti, a refiner which has imported gold from Sudan.36 Valcambi
has rejected these accusations.37
26 Reuters, Exclusive: From Russia with gold: UAE cashes in as sanctions bite, 25 May 2023.
27 Global Financial Integrity, “Analyzing Trade, Oil and Gold: Recommendations to Support Trade Integrity in Sudan,” April 2020;
The Observatory of Economic Complexity, Gold, accessed September 2023.
28 See Financial Action Task Force (FATF), “Black and grey” lists, accessed September 2023; this list calls for increased monitoring for
money laundering and terrorism financing risks.
29 See European Commission, High risk third countries and the International context content of anti-money laundering and
countering the financing of terrorism, accessed September 2023.
30 See Sudan’s Ministry of Minerals annual reports.
31 See International Crisis Group, A Race against Time to Halt Sudan’s Collapse, 22 June 2023.
32 Mohamed Salah Abdelrahman, Sudan Transparency and Policy Tracker, How Mercury is Poisoning a Nation and Gross
Mismanagement is Aggravating the Problem, October 2022.
33 Global Financial Integrity, Analyzing Trade, Oil and Gold: Recommendations to Support Trade Integrity in Sudan, May 2020.
34 Hiba Fageeri, Aljazeera, How Sudan’s Gold Wealth is Being Stolen, 9 October 2019.
35 The Guardian, “Militia strike gold to cast a shadow over Sudan's hopes of prosperity,” 10 February 2020, available at: https://www.
theguardian.com/global-development/2020/feb/10/militia-strike-gold-to-cast-a-shadow-over-sudans-hopes-of-prosperity.
36 See the following news articles in September 2023: Swiss info, RTS, NZZ.
37 Swissinfo, Valcambi refinery denies sourcing ‘dirty’ gold from Dubai, 8 September 2020.
10 11
sbuh
gnidart
dlog
fo
snoitartsullI

Box 2 - Trading hub Switzerland
Switzerland is an interesting example of a gold trading hub that is geographically, politically
and culturally close to the EU. Switzerland processes around 70 percent of globally traded
gold, with this trade amounting to nearly US $ 87 billion in 2021.38 Almost all of this gold is
imported from other countries; Switzerland refines and brands it, and then exports it to global
destinations. In 2022, 66% of the gold that entered the EU came from Switzerland.39
In 2023, new Swiss due diligence obligations entered into force. The legislative changes affect
two sets of obligations: they contain provisions on transparency of nonfinancial matters,
and on due diligence and transparency regarding minerals and metals (3T and gold) from
zones in conflict zones or with child labor.40 Despite these new obligations, which include the
implementation of a system by which the supply chain can be traced, there remains a lack of
transparency regarding the origin of gold imported into Switzerland.
In March 2022, the Federal Administrative Court decided that trade relations are subject to
tax secrecy.41 It is now to the Swiss Supreme Court to soon decide whether Swiss refiners
have to disclose their suppliers, based on the principle of freedom of information. Pending
its ruling, Swiss refiners are not obliged to disclose their gold suppliers, and hence the
origin of the gold.
In recent years, there have been numerous scandals linking gold refined in Switzerland to
human rights abuses and conflict financing, demonstrating that the existing control measures
are inadequate.42
In May 2022, the NGO SWISSAID raised the alarm, stating that “Swiss refiners have not been
importing gold directly from Russia since February 2022 due to sanctions [imposed in
response to the war of aggression against Ukraine]. At the same time, imports from the United
Arab Emirates have exploded, raising fears that Russian gold may end up in Switzerland after
passing through Dubai.” SWISSAID fears that some of this gold is helping to finance the war.43
Given the weak implementation of the EU Regulation, it is likely that parts of this gold flow
enter the EU.
38 The Observatory of Economic Complexity, Gold, accessed September 2023.
39 This concerned gold starting with HS code 7108. See World Integrated Trade Solution, European Union Gold (including gold
plated with platinum) unwrought or in semi-manufactured forms, or in powder form imports by country in 2022, accessed April
2023.
40 Fedlex, Ordinance on Due Diligence and Transparency in relation to Minerals and Metals from Conflict-Affected Areas and Child
Labour, accessed September 2023.
41 See Swissinfo, Swiss court rules against gold trade transparency: NGO, 31 March 2022; GFBV, Bundesverwaltungsgericht
entscheidet gegen Transparenz im Goldhandel, 31 March 2022.
42 See for example: GFBV, Dirty Gold, accessed September 2023; Global Witness, Beneath the Shine: A Tale of Two Gold Refiners, 16
July 2020; SWISSAID, Golden Detour: The hidden face of the gold trade between the United Arab Emirates and Switzerland, July
2020; Aljazeera, Swiss gold or smuggled Zimbabwean gold? No one knows, 6 April 2023; RTS, Révélations: les secrets inavouables
de la plus grande raffinerie d’or de Suisse, 3 September 2023.
43 SWISSAID, Alarming rise in gold imports from Dubai, 17 May 2022.
12 13
sbuh
gnidart
dlog
fo
snoitartsullI

The role of due diligence schemes in the Regulation
Companies, particularly refiners and smelters, often look for support to comply with due diligence
obligations through participation in so-called due diligence schemes. Under the EU Regulation, these
are defined as “a combination of voluntary supply chain due diligence procedures, tools and mechanisms,
including independent third-party audits, developed and overseen by governments, industry associations
or groupings of interested organisations.”44 In the case of 3TG, these initiatives have mostly been led by
industry associations. According to the interviewed MSCAs, the majority of the Union importers source
from refiners and smelters which are assessed by major industry schemes, such as the London Bullion
Market Association (LBMA) and the already mentioned Responsible Minerals Initiative (RMI).
According to the EU Regulation, interested parties may submit industry schemes for “recognition” by
the EC,45 which entails a process aiming to increase their level of scrutiny and accountability. In January
2019, the EC adopted a Delegated Act setting out rules on the methodology and criteria related to the
recognition of due diligence schemes. The central requirement for recognition is that the scheme's
standards and implementation fully align with the OECD Guidance.46 Through a contracted consultant,
the EC has been working on the recognition of these submitted industry schemes for years. Nevertheless,
as of September 2023, the EC had not completed the recognition process for any 3TG industry scheme,
despite some progress.47
For Union importers, sourcing from refiners or smelters that can show conformity with an EC-recognized
scheme could facilitate compliance with the Regulation. Firstly, when companies import metals from
conformant smelters or refiners, their chain of custody is not required to include information about the
countries of origin of minerals purchased from them, nor – when the minerals come from CAHRAs or
when other supply chain risks have been identified – should it include the additional information that the
OECD Guidance calls for.48 This significantly limits the scope and the difficulty for importers to operate
their chain of custody. The underlying rationale is that refiners and smelters that can show evidence of
conformity with a recognized scheme already have strong due diligence systems in place, which enable
them to properly collect and analyze information on the supply chain while being in a better position to
do this than downstream companies. This rule also avoids the multiplication of audits upstream. Without
it, every downstream company indeed would be required to individually perform upstream audits for all
the metals it imports.
Moreover, smelters and refiners that participate in a recognized scheme will be more likely to be placed
on the EU list of “global responsible smelters and refiners”49 (also known as the White list), while EU metals
importers that can demonstrate to be sourcing exclusively from smelters and refiners on the White list,
are exempted to carry out third-party audits, which saves them time and resources.50
Importantly, while EU importers can use information from industry schemes to inform their due diligence
process, the Regulation is clear that they retain individual responsibility for their due diligence and sourcing
decisions.51 This individual responsibility is also emphasized by the industry schemes. For example, the
RMI, one of the major industry schemes, stressed that companies that engage with a scheme are required
to conduct their own due diligence checks on the information provided by the scheme.52
44 See Article 2 (m) of the of the Regulation (EU) 2017/821, page 6.
45 See Article 3.3. of the of the Regulation (EU) 2017/821, page 8.
46 Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/429; based on the OECD’s Methodology for the Alignment Assessment of Industry Programmes
with the OECD Minerals Guidance, Criteria on transparency: B.9 to B.24, pages 19-22.
47 This process has taken much longer than foreseen. Some progress has been made, for example, the RMI received the final
alignment assessment in April 2023, which indicated that RMAP is fully aligned, but formal publication has been delayed.
48 Article 4(g)(iv)(v) Regulation (EU) 2017/821, page 8.
49 Article 9 of the Regulation (EU) 2017/821, page 12.
50 Article 4(g)(iv) Regulation (EU) 2017/821, page 8.
51 Recital 14 of the Regulation (EU) 2017/821, page 3.
52 RMI, The RMI FAQ: Upstream Due Diligence & Use of Upstream Mechanisms, 1 August 2023.
12 13

While some MSCAs do not plan to include the participation in an industry scheme in their selection criteria
for ex-post checks, other MSCAs consider that sourcing from a recognized scheme makes selection for an
ex-post check less likely.53
It is important to note that even the best due diligence schemes and third-party audits have inherent flaws
and limitations. This has been demonstrated by civil society organizations, including Human Rights Watch,
German Watch, and SOMO. They have criticized the overreliance on schemes and audits, stressing that
these should only be one tool that companies and regulators use, alongside other sources of information,
such as media, academic, and NGO reports.54 Also, the MSCAs and the EC will need to allocate sufficient
resources to conduct proper checks enabling them to independently assess whether imported 3TG is
tainted by conflict or human rights abuses. This analysis can be partly based on information provided by
schemes and audits, but should also draw on a broader range of sources, including research done at the
upstream level.
Box 3 - LuNa Smelter: an example of due diligence data management by
a tin metal smelter operating in the Great Lakes Region55
LuNa Smelter Ltd. (LuNa) is a Kigali-based the form of segmented digital certificates. These
tin metal smelter, operating within a European certificates link data collected from different
industrial group called Luma Holding Ltd. Value supply chain participants to unique identifiers and
creation is based on the development of a stable raw QR-Codes, which can be physically attached to
materials supply chain achieved in Rwanda and the material shipments and tracked along the supply
region. LuNa is the first and only tin metal smelter chain. Two types of certificates are generated.
in Africa conformant with the RMI Responsible The entity certificate contains company-level
Minerals Assurance Process (RMAP), which information that does not change often, e.g.,
assesses the smelter’s due diligence systems and a business license, permits and certifications.
processes to conform with its standards. The shipment certificate contains information
specific to a particular shipment, such as type of
In general, management and transfer of due
material, grade, weight, chemical composition,
diligence data, as well as maintaining immutable
sourcing details, and other traceability-related
records, are significant challenges for minerals
information.
supply chain stakeholders, especially for the
downstream sector. The LuNa Due Diligence The data is stored in three layers. The public
Team sought a solution to improve the inefficiency layer is unencrypted and visible to all the users
of traditional systems through the use of of the blockchain sharing a supply chain. The
emerging digital technologies. In a pilot project, transparency layer contains data that should be
a blockchain-based solution was chosen due visible to those participants who share a supply
to its key properties, such as decentralization, chain, and the private layer contains data visible
immutability, and transparency. LuNa works with only to the current and successive participants
the blockchain-based traceability platform that of the supply chain. This way, the confidential
transmits raw material provenance data in information is available only to the authorized
recipients.
53 See Regulation (EU) 2017/821, Article 11 for more details on the ex-post checks.
54 See for example Human Rights Watch, EU’s Flawed Reliance on Audits, Certifications for Raw Materials Rules, 24 May 2023;
German Watch, An Examination of Industry Standards in The Raw Materials Sector, 4 July 2022; SOMO, A piece, not a proxy, 25
November 2022.
55 This box is based largely on written information provided in May 2023 by Aleksandra Cholewa-Domanagić, Director of Investment
and Development at Luma Holding Ltd and PhD student at the University of Szczecin. While PAX and IPIS have not independently
assessed this smelter’s practices around the management of due diligence data, this is an interesting example of how innovative
technology could be used to improve due diligence data management. Independent assessments of these innovative tools will
however be important.
14 15

Disclosure obligations for importers and sub-standard reporting issues
Union importers are required to provide reports to MSCAs of third-party audits or evidence of conformity
with a recognized scheme (see above). They also need to make available to their immediate downstream
purchasers “all information gained and maintained pursuant to their supply chain due diligence with due
regard for business confidentiality and other competitive concerns.”56 The importers also have the obligation
to publicly report on their supply chain due diligence policies and practices for responsible sourcing;
this should include a summary report of third-party audits, including the name of the auditor. Public
reporting should be done on an annual basis, “as widely as possible, including on the internet.”57
The feedback we received from MSCAs on the reporting by Union importers and the included audit
reports of their suppliers leads us to conclude that many Union importers are not yet used to the new
obligations under the Regulation. MSCAs reported that they had received a limited number of third-
party audits reports, and that the available audit reports seldom meet the standards of the Regulation.58
A common deficiency in importers’ reporting is the lack of substantial evidence regarding their own
sourcing practices.
Further, several MSCAs flag that reports of EU importers are often inadequate with regard to information
on the origin of the sourced mineral as the data flow usually stops at the level of the smelter/refiner. In
the case of 3T minerals for example, China was most often mentioned as the country of origin. Whether
the materials were indeed mined in China, or whether they were only smelted there, was often not clear
to the MSCAs.
The quality of audits and the technical competences of auditors are another issue of major concern. In
this regard, some industry schemes have played a positive role by developing trainings and tools for
auditors. For the effective implementation of the EU Regulation, it is important that auditors, who are
located in all parts of the world, receive high quality training in order to ensure that they carry out their
audits in adherence to the highest standards.
Finally, Union importers of metals purportedly tried to make use of the exemption pursuant to Article 6
(2), which exonerates them from conducting third-party audits if they prove that all their smelters and
refiners are compliant with the Regulation. However, they did so without sending substantive evidence,
such as third-party audit reports, which the Regulation clearly calls for. Where audits needed to be
examined by an MSCA, for example in the course of ex-post checks, the audit reports of Union importers
in many cases appeared to be unavailable. MSCAs explained that since companies had expected that the
major industry schemes would have been recognized by 2021, they did not timely organize their audits.
Transparency at the member state level
According to the Regulation, the MSCAs have to conduct checks when they are “in possession of relevant
information, including on the basis of substantiated concerns provided by third parties, concerning the
compliance by a Union importer with this Regulation”.59 These third parties are likely to be journalists, NGOs
and other civil society groups, fulfilling their role as watchdogs. The problem is that these parties can only
share their substantiated concerns directly with the MSCAs if they can prove the link between affected
minerals and EU imports. To date, however, third parties denouncing abuses in producing countries have
to our knowledge not yet been able to link human rights violations to Union importers, for the simple
reason that they have no access to information about mineral imports.
56 Article 7(2) of Regulation (EU) 2017/82.
57 Article 7(3) of Regulation (EU) 2017/82.
58 Some of the competent authorities we interviewed were still in the preliminary phase of the post-check process and could not yet
answer this question. Those who already received a considerable number of reports, stated that the provided information usually
stops at the level of the refiner or smelter, and that the information of the smelters or refiners, if included in the report, does often
not meet the expected quality standards.
59 See article 11(2) of Regulation (EU) 2017/82.
14 15

Several NGOs60, therefore, have advocated the disclosure of the list of Union importers under the
Regulation, but the EC left the decision to the MSCAs, and their approaches vary. Austria will publish the
names of importers, the Czech Republic will publish the names of importers subject to ex-post checks,
and the Netherlands will publish the companies’ due diligence reports on a dedicated website. So far,
however, it seems that most other MSCAs will not publish the names of importers that fall under the
Regulation. They generally invoke reasons of corporate confidentiality and data protection, despite the
fact that Article 12(1) of the Union Customs Code explicitly mentions the possibility of exceptions to
confidentiality rules with regards to information held by Customs.61 Of particular interest in this context
is the initiative of the French NGO Sherpa, which, in August 2020, initiated a proceeding with the Paris
Administrative Court requiring the authorities to disclose the list of companies under the Regulation.62
The Court, in November 2022, ruled that the names of the companies should be disclosed as they are not
covered by neither business nor customs secrecy. The ruling also stressed that these companies had a
“duty of transparency.”63
Transparency on EU import data
The EC does not provide a public disaggregated dataset on 3TG imports into the EU. The available public
data is grouped per importing and exporting country and/or trading bloc but does not specify the
numbers or the names of unique importers nor their respective import volumes. Without this data, it is
impossible to assess the number of importers that fall above/below mineral volume thresholds triggering
the application of the Regulation, nor is it possible to determine where exempted materials are imported
from.64 This is very relevant information because literature on the trade in illegal and conflict-affected
3TG clearly illustrates that much of this trade takes place in quantities that are below the thresholds.65
Hence, there is a risk that the current thresholds exempt importers of some of the highest-risk materials
entering the EU from due diligence obligations. Again, without disaggregated data, it is not possible to
verify this risk and hence adequately assess the effectiveness of the Regulation.
60 See previous publications from the NGO coalition on Conflict Minerals: 2016, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
61 Article 12(1), Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union
Customs Code. Such information may, however, be disclosed without permission where the customs authorities are obliged or
authorized to do so pursuant to the provisions in force, particularly in respect of data protection, or in connection with legal
proceedings.
62 Sherpa, Mining with Meaning: Protecting Human Rights and the Environment in the shift to clean energy, 29 October 2020, page 27.
63 Mediapart, Minerais de Guerre: La Justice écarte le « secret des affaires » invoqué par l’exécutif, 21 November 2022.
64 Article 1(2) of the Regulation specifies that the requirements of the Regulation will apply to the import of the minerals and metals
specified by use of Combined Nomenclature (CN) in its Annex 1. Article 1(3) qualifies this by adding that importers that fall below
the annual volume thresholds also specified in Annex 1 will not be subject to these requirements.
65 See for example the following articles: The Sentry, Golden Laundromat, October 2018; OECD, Where does Colombian gold go,
2018; UN, http://www.undocs.org/S/2020/482.
16 17

2. CAN THE EU REGULATION AVOID
DISENGAGEMENT?
When the EU Regulation was drafted, putting in place measures to avoid de-risking by EU importers was
high on the agenda.66 De-risking is when a company chooses to avoid sourcing from CAHRAs and/or
artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) altogether, rather than considering engagement in due diligence
and adopting nuanced risk assessment measures. The negative consequences of the US "Dodd Frank
Act" (US DFA), namely the so-called de facto embargo hitting the DRC and its neighbors in 2011, figured
prominently in the EU debates.67
Sourcing from CAHRAs and/or from ASM entails significant due diligence, audit and organizational costs
while sourcing from LSM outside CAHRAs is often a low-risk business decision (see box 4). Moreover, the
existence of due diligence does not (yet) appear to positively affect value downstream.68 On top of this,
there is a fear of reputational risk when doing business in CAHRAs and/ or with ASM. In short, there are few
incentives for companies to actually engage with ASM/CAHRAs and the trend to raise the bar in terms of
sourcing standards has exacerbated this reluctance. We should add here that companies tend to look for
a binary answer to the question: is this supplier clean or is he not? Yet, this lack of nuance in supplier risk
scores, ratings and certifications stimulates de-risking and contravenes the spirit of the OECD Guidance
on which most of these standards are built. The Guidance indeed is conceived to stimulate a process of
continuous and progressive improvement, which so far has been overshadowed by a prioritization of
(simplified) compliance.
De-risking has had many far-reaching implications for CAHRAs and for the ASM sector with risk-aversive
business decisions leading the mineral trade to go further underground. Even if regulated mid- and
downstream companies are reluctant to buy from CAHRAs/ ASM, there will always be enough buyers,
either unregulated or illegal. At best, disengagement is at odds with the premise of the Regulation
that responsible behavior by companies operating in CAHRAs can stimulate positive socio-economic
development. At worst, regulating mineral sourcing from CAHRAs encourages informal and/or illegal
trade.69
For these reasons, the design of the Regulation was meant to minimize the risk of a de facto boycott of
CAHRAs and/or ASM.70 By way of precaution, EU legislators included a global CAHRA list, stressed an
inclusive focus, and foresaw accompanying measures.
66 See for example: EC Delegated Regulation 2019/429 of 11 January 2019, Supplementing Regulation (EU) 2017/821 of the European
Parliament and of the Council as regards the methodology and criteria for the assessment and recognition of supply chain due
diligence schemes concerning tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold.
67 For example, in its Impact assessment of the Regulation (SWD(2014) 53 final), the EU wrote in 2014: “… the US DFA has created an
incentive to avoid sourcing from the region, and in particular from DRC. Sourcing outside the region is therefore a low-cost and a
low-risk business decision whereas remaining engaged entails significant due diligence, audit and organisational costs.” See also:
Joint Communication to the EU Parliament and the Council /* JOIN/2014/08 final.
68 OECD (2021), Cost and Value of Due Diligence in Mineral Supply Chains, OECD Position Paper.
69 Joint Communication to the EU Parliament and the Council /* JOIN/2014/08 final.
70 Koch, Dirk Jan & Olga Burlyuk (2019) Bounded policy learning? EU efforts to anticipate unintended consequences in conflict
minerals legislation, Journal of European Public Policy.
16 17

Box 4 - Why is it important not to exclude ASM?
The ASM sector is estimated to produce 26% of tantalum, 25% of tin, 6% of tungsten, and 25%
of primary gold worldwide.71 Moreover, it provides a livelihood to people in many producing
countries: the World Bank estimates that 44,670,000 people are employed in ASM globally72,
while the number of people depending on the sector is much higher. Besides the huge potential
for socio-economic development, there can also be commercial reasons to source from ASM.
These include securing diverse and new sources of supply while taking into account that both
tantalum and tungsten are EU-listed Critical Raw Materials (CRMs).73 Moreover, sourcing from
ASM can respond to an increasing consumer interest in materials and products that benefit
producer communities.74
However, as is the case for CAHRAs, due diligence costs may be higher when sourcing from
ASM. Moreover, the ASM sector has a bad reputation as smaller upstream actors, often working
informally in a fragile environment, are more vulnerable to the risks listed in the OECD Guidance's
Annex II.75 In addition, most sourcing requirements are beyond the reach of ASM actors. The
consequence of all this is the phenomenon of ‘de-risking’ by mineral traders and their clients,
which in turn pushes the ASM sector into a downward spiral. De facto embargoes exacerbate
the stigma associated with ASM, and drive it toward informal or secondary markets with less
vigorous sourcing practices.76
71 Occupational Knowledge International, see: http://www.okinternational.org/mining.
72 Delve Platform, https://delvedatabase.org/data, visited on 28 September 2023.
73 EC Study on the Critical Raw Materials for the EU, 2023, Final Report.
74 OECD, Anti-corruption and integrity hub, Sourcing gold from ASM miners. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/corruption-
integrity/checklists/sourcing-gold-from-artisanal-and-small-scale-gold-miners-aci.html
75 OECD (2021), Cost and Value of Due Diligence in Mineral Supply Chains, OECD Position Paper.
76 For example, the LBMA concluded in its 2021 annual report that artisanally mined gold currently accounts for less than 1% of the
throughput of LBMA refiners, and has dropped 16% since 2019 (LBMA, Responsible Sourcing Report 2021).
18 19

CAHRA list
In order to support importing companies, the EU compiled a public list of CAHRAs77 that allows for new
countries and regions to be added or removed over time. According to article 2(f), conflict-affected and
high-risk areas are “areas in a state of armed conflict or fragile post-conflict as well as areas witnessing weak
or non-existent governance and security, such as failed states, and widespread and systematic violations of
international law, including human rights abuses”.78 With 28 countries on the list at the time of writing79, the
risk of a boycott of one country or region is reduced, but companies may still decide to refrain from doing
business with any country listed. In short, the list risks stigmatizing a whole area’s mineral production,
thus leading buyers to exclude regions that are in need of responsible investments and trade.80
The CAHRA list is non-exhaustive and indicative in the sense that, under the Regulation, EU importers
are not relieved from due diligence obligations when sourcing from countries that are not included.81
It is, however, doubtful that all companies and MSCAs use the list in the nuanced way it is supposed to
be handled. The interpretation of the list varies per MSCA: some have announced it will not impact its
risk assessments while others have indicated it will play an important role in their risk assessments with
regards to ex-post checks.82
Civil society organizations from producing countries have criticized the CAHRA list for not being complete
as it does not include transit and trading countries. For example, Congolese civil society representatives
argue that the CAHRA list discriminates against their country and contributes to mineral smuggling: the
non-inclusion of Rwanda and Uganda confers these countries a safe status, which encourages mineral
smuggling through their territories.83 It is a fact indeed that the majority of conflict and high-risk gold is
not officially exported by producing countries but by their neighbors.84
77 See: https://www.cahraslist.net. The EC contracted consulting company RAND Europe to draft the CAHRA list.
78 Article 2(f) Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
79 October 2023.
80 OECD on the level: Due diligence in mineral supply chains and the quest for a list of conflict-affected and high-risk areas, Available
at: https://oecdonthelevel.com/2020/05/29/due-diligence-in-mineral-supply-chains-and-the-quest-for-a-list-of-conflict-affected-
and-high-risk-areas/.
81 See: https://www.cahraslist.net
82 Interviews held with MSCAs between December 2022 and March 2023.
83 EurAc, German Watch, IPIS. The European Regulation on Responsible Mineral Sourcing: what are the lessons learned so far?
September 2022.
84 IPIS, Regulating responsible sourcing of 3TG minerals, in IPIS Insights on Due Diligence on Mineral Sourcing, IPIS, December 2019.
Another example is South Sudan, see: Global Initiative against transnational organized crime, Tarnished Hope, May 2023.
18 19

Box 5 - Conflict Minerals versus Responsible Minerals
Over the past years, the concept of conflict minerals has become the subject of intense public
and academic debate.85 The link between ‘mining’ and ‘conflict’ can be complex and indirect,
while CAHRAs often suffer from outdated and oversimplified views that tarnish the reputation
of their entire natural resources sector.86 Moreover, the extraction of minerals is frequently
linked to human rights abuses that do not necessarily occur in the framework of violent conflict.
In fact, in many top producing countries of 3TGs serious human rights violations such as child
labor occur, while they are not affected by (post-) conflict, weak or non-existing governance or
systematic violations of international law87, and thus are not listed as CAHRAs.88
It is, therefore, important that due diligence legislation covers risks beyond ‘conflict’ by
encompassing a broader range of thematic areas, including environmental, social and
governance risks (ESG). The EU law proposal for a Directive on Corporate Sustainability Due
Diligence89 confirms this trend toward widening the focus on ESGs.90
The trend to cover risks beyond CAHRAs has also influenced the conceptual interpretation of
the 3TG Regulation. Over the last years, the (unofficial) title of the Regulation was changed by
many, including the European External Action Service (EEAS), from Conflict Minerals Regulation
to Responsible Minerals Regulation. Although there has never been an official communication
on this, consulting company Levin Sources suggests that “the discourse of mineral supply chains
has evolved and today customers and civil society urge companies to respect human rights as well
as environmental standards when sourcing minerals.”91 Levin Sources argues that by continuing
to refer to the Regulation as the ‘Conflict Minerals Regulation’ we are setting too low a bar for
companies.92 Obviously, semantics alone will not do the job without mandatory requirements
following suit. In summary, as long as the focus solely remains on conflict-related risks, the
Regulation does not deserve the Responsible Mineral Regulation stamp.
85 See for example: Christoph Vogel, Conflict Minerals Inc: War, Profit and White Saviourism in Eastern Congo, Hurst & Co., London,
2022. He argues that the concept ‘conflict minerals’ relies on colonial frames to drive change and that it has led to policies that
have perpetuated structural violence.
86 See for example: Matthysen, K. & Gobbers, E., Armed conflict, insecurity, and mining in eastern DRC: Reflections on the nexus
between natural resources and armed conflict, (IPIS, Antwerp, 2022), 40p.
87 See: EC Conflict Minerals Regulation explained
88 Maplecroft, Tech supply chains risk links human rights abuses outside ‘conflict minerals’ hotspots. April 2017
89 Proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence and amending
Directive (EU) 2019/1937, February 23, 2023.
90 Loch, Mthembu-Salter, Schaap, Loch, Conflict Minerals – Over a Decade of Effort and Impact, Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung, March
2023.
91 Estelle Levin-Nally, The ‘Conflict Minerals Regulation’ or the ‘Regulation on Responsible Sourcing Minerals’; Evolving purpose and
terminology, 22 February 2022.
92 Estelle Levin-Nally, The ‘Conflict Minerals Regulation’ or the ‘Regulation on Responsible Sourcing Minerals’; Evolving purpose and
terminology, 22 February 2022.
20 21

Inclusive focus
Unlike the US DFA, the EU Regulation's risk-based approach does not require European companies to claim
that their products are ‘conflict free’, but expects them to show that they have a due diligence system
in place. While this more inclusive focus is meant to avoid that companies disengage from challenging
environments,93 the question remains whether it fulfils the intention.
Union importers are legally allowed to import metals and minerals derived from ASM sources and/or
originating from CAHRAs. The Regulation, however, urges importers to perform a number of additional
checks when they import minerals originating from CAHRAs.94 In case they import metals, which
constitute the majority of imports under the Regulation, Union importers need to provide records of the
third-party audit reports of the supplying smelters and refiners, or evidence of conformity with a supply
chain due diligence scheme (see chapter 1). As this engenders additional duties and thus higher costs for
smelters and refiners, there is a theoretical risk that they will disengage from CAHRAs altogether.
We have, however, not observed any systematic disengagement from ASM or CAHRAs since the Regulation
entered into force.95 Unfortunately, there is no evidence allowing us to conclude that smelters/refiners are
constructively engaging with CAHRAs/ASM while observing the EU Regulation. On the contrary, smelters
and refiners outside the EU rarely disclose the origin of their minerals and do not apply enhanced due
diligence when they source from CAHRAs/ASM (see chapter 1).
The recognition of industry schemes by the EU could change this situation. As mentioned in chapter 1,
individual companies often rely on industry schemes, and both the MSCAs and EU importers are eagerly
waiting for them to be recognized. At the same time, industry schemes are desperate for this to happen
as they feel pressure from their members. This poses a dilemma because it could lead to industry schemes
raising the bar of their internal standards and with that, widening the gap between realities on the ground
and downstream standards, which in turn can cause de-risking and exclusion of ASM/CAHRAs. Logic wills
that unattainable standards lead to CAHRA/ASM exclusion from legal markets, unless smelters/refiners
continue to maintain the current lack of transparency on the origin of their raw materials.
This potential problem was already flagged by the OECD in 2018 when it called for refiner and smelter-
level programs to do more to discourage the nowadays still common default position of smelters and
refiners to disengage from ASM or higher risk areas.96 Progress has been made in this regard, for example
both the LBMA and RMI are increasingly encouraging progressive and continuous improvement, e.g., by
recognizing the CRAFT Code.97 For the effectiveness of the EU Regulation, it is fundamental that the EU,
through its recognition of industry schemes, keeps encouraging this progressive approach.
93 IPIS, Regulating responsible sourcing of 3TG minerals, IPIS Insights on Due Diligence on Mineral Sourcing, IPIS, December 2019.
94 Article 4(f)(v) Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
95 In the case of the US DFA, it was very clear that companies stopped sourcing from the DRC as soon as the Act entered into force.
This has, however, not happened since 2021. Neither have we observed an increased interest or private sector commitment to
upstream due diligence programs (e.g. iTSCi).
96 OECD 2018, Highlights Alignment Assessment of Industry programs with the OECD minerals guidance.
97 See for more information these articles on LBMA and Craft Code and RMI and Craft Code and the Craft Code explained.
20 21

Accompanying measures
The EU created a special fund for accompanying measures to promote responsibly sourced minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas. In its Joint Communication of 5 March 2014, the EC committed to
the implementation of such measures, with the aim of reaching a high level of participation by economic
operators and of ensuring that a global, coherent and comprehensive approach was taken to promote
responsible sourcing from CAHRAs.98 Well-designed measures have the potential to promote a positive
socio-economic impact of the Regulation on local communities in producing countries. To achieve that,
a concerted effort is needed to support producing countries in specific domains, like good governance,
ASM formalization, and the fight against corruption, and to reduce the cost at the upstream level of
certification mechanisms necessary for due diligence.
To date, however, there has been no systematic effort to inform producing, transit and trading countries
about the new rules in the EU market and the changes that their EU-based buyers (often many tiers
further) require.99 To illustrate this, when we consulted geological services in charge of ASM mining from
15 African countries, five of which are on the CAHRA list, it appeared that only the DRC had ever heard of
the Regulation while our interlocutors from the other countries had never heard about it.100 Additionally,
rights holders have not been consulted nor informed.101 Obviously, to prepare producing countries to
meet the EU requirements, especially in the light of disengagement, it is vital to create awareness and
enhance monitoring capacities.
We reiterate here that the EC does not provide a public disaggregated dataset on 3TG imports (see
chapter 1). It is hence not possible to know which producing regions are affected by the Regulation. This
in turn makes it difficult for civil society organizations to design on-the-ground programs to support
its implementation and/or mitigate adverse impacts on certain communities, such as those of artisanal
miners.
If the accompanying measures are truly intended to be a lever of action to meet the challenges of producing
countries, their potential is undeniably under-exploited as of today. While many of the measures adopted
so far are indeed aimed at supporting artisanal mining and reinforcing state structures102, interventions
remain disconnected from each other. We see a need for more political engagement by the EU in
producing countries, without which financial support is ineffective.
98 Regulation (EU) 2017/821.
99 NGOs have taken some initiatives to inform civil society organizations in producing countries. The EPRM has also made some
efforts to inform producing countries and recently the EU Delegation in the DRC has drawn up a questionnaire on the awareness
of the EU Regulation in the country (see e.g. Workshops EurAc, German Watch, IPIS (The European Regulation on Responsible
Mineral Sourcing: what are the lessons learned so far?); Workshop RMI/GIZ.
100 The geological services consulted during this study were based in the following countries: Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Comoros,
Djibouti, the Republic of Congo, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Madagascar, Morocco, Mauritania, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
the Central African Republic, Chad, and Tunisia.
101 See for example: UA Working Paper 2023/04.
102 For example, see the EPRM projects.
2222 2233

RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Capacity of the MSCAs and the EC
MSCAs and the EC play a pivotal role in ensuring consistent enforcement of the law across different EU
countries. Currently, the differences between the MSCAs are substantial, both in terms of available staff
and sector expertise, as in the way they interpret the law. This is very problematic as it creates differences
between countries and misunderstandings at the level of importers, which could finally lead EU importers
to move headquarters to another EU country.
With more EU due diligence Regulations upcoming, the pressure on MSCAs will only grow. However,
without proper implementation at Member State level, any due diligence Regulation will be useless.
The EC should take a leadership role to assist MSCAs in order to ensure robust implementation of due
diligence Regulations.
Both MSCAs and the EC should be better equipped to monitor the implementation of Union importers,
this includes:
• MSCAs should be adequately funded, staffed and trained. Training should not be limited to
the technical application of the Regulation, but also focus on the wider political and economic
context of responsible mineral sourcing;
• The EC should guide and assist the MSCAs and oversee the overall coherence of the
implementation to help create a level playing field for companies across the EU;
• The EC should get a mandate and dedicated resources to carry out its own ex-post checks
on EU importers and to independently investigate substantiated concerns from third
parties or authorities on human rights abuses or environmental harm in 3TG supply chains.
Such investigations should include determining whether minerals associated with such
wrongdoings are actually imported into the EU.
2. Accompanying measures
A decade of due diligence implementation has taught us that the tension between avoiding any human
rights abuses in the supply chain on the one hand, and remaining engaged in CAHRAs and/ or ASM on
the other hand, cannot be left to markets alone. If the EU cares for an improved human rights situation in
producing countries, including in CAHRAs, it has to actively intervene, both by encouraging downstream
companies to engage in CAHRAs/ASM through allowing for progressive improvement, and by supporting
upstream producers to work towards the EU standards.
1. The EU should actively intervene in market dynamics in order to encourage mid- and downstream
companies to engage with the ASM sector and in CAHRAs. The EU should encourage (commercial)
incentives for responsible sourcing, instead of only focusing on compliance. Measures should include:
• Only recognize indusnumtry schemes that create and increase the supply of 3TG that are
responsibly sourced from ASM/CAHRAs. Industry schemes are eager to obtain EU recognition.
The EU should use this leverage and include mandatory engagement with ASM and CAHRAs
while setting clear and measurable criteria. This inevitably includes accepting a certain level of
imperfection while encouraging progressive improvement;
• Publicly recognize downstream actors that create and sustain the demand of 3TG from ASM
and/or CAHRAs, so as to boost their reputation. The EU can organize a campaign to inform
consumers on the development potential when buying products that were responsibly
sourced from ASM/CAHRAs. This could lead to consumers willing to pay a premium for
responsibly sourced metals;
2222 2233

RECOMMENDATIONS
• The EU is planning to specifically identify those smelters/refiners on the White list that source
responsibly from conflict zones, so as to incentivize the legitimate trade. This should be
implemented (once industry schemes are recognized) and also include sourcing from ASM;
• Organize a campaign to clarify to MSCAs and companies that it is allowed and even
encouraged to source responsibly from ASM/CAHRAs which should lead to abuses being
addressed instead of hidden;
• Explore how companies that disclose human rights, environmental or bribery risks in good
faith and in line with international standards can benefit from better legal defenses against
civil or consumer suits;
• Publicly recognize the importance of artisanal mining to local employment and development.
• Encourage cooperation between artisanal and industrial mining operations as a best practice
and a conflict mitigation strategy if conducted in accordance with adequate safety, labor, and
environmental safeguards.
2. We recommend the EU to actively intervene in market dynamics in order to prepare the ASM sector
and CAHRAs to implement the standards of the Regulation to ensure EU market access. Measures
should include:
• Informing (local) authorities, mining cooperatives and civil society organizations in 3TG
producing countries on the EU Regulation, the OECD Guidance and Annex II risks;
• Political dialogue with producing states on the challenges and needs related to creating an
enabling environment for responsible sourcing. Such dialogue should include themes like
good governance, corruption, and tax reforms;
• Encouragement of technical support to the ASM sector for progressive improvement;
• Support for the installation of smelters and refiners in producing countries in order to shorten
the supply chains and encourage transparency.
3. CAHRA list
Many top exporting countries of 3TG pose risks for businesses to become associated with serious human
rights violations. However, the majority of these countries are not included in the CAHRAs list as they
are not affected by (post-) conflict nor witness weak or non-existing governance or systematic violations
of international law. The EU Regulation should not only cover conflict-related risks but address all grave
human rights risks along the supply chain. This means that the Regulation should encompass a broader
risk-set, including environmental risks.
It is important to add new categories as we have learned that neither companies nor MSCAs have sufficient
expertise on risks related to sourcing from trading hubs and transit countries. Transit countries should be
added to the list because the majority of conflict and high-risk gold is exported by neighboring countries
instead of producing countries. Trading hubs should be added as they are often confused by MSCAs with
producing countries.
• We recommend that the Regulation shifts its scope from conflict-related risks to
environmental, social and governance (ESG) risks, beyond conflict settings. This entails
abandoning the CAHRA list and focusing on the identification of risks, including red flags, as
included in the OECD Due Diligence Guidance.
• If the EU would decide to keep the CAHRA list, we suggest to add a new list next to the CAHRA
list: high-risk transit and trade countries (e.g., UAE, Uganda). These categories can be indicated
24 25

RECOMMENDATIONS
for example in a different color on top of the world map with CAHRAs on the CAHRA list
website. ‘High-risk’ in this context would mean countries with a negative track record in issues
such as anti-money laundering, fraud, truthful reporting, and corruption, as well as countries
where legislation and practices are not supporting high levels of transparency.
4. Management system obligations
There is a significant risk that refiners or smelters (especially in countries with weak safeguards) provide
false information about the country of mineral origin – for example, Congolese gold being falsely labeled
as Ugandan gold. MSCAs have, understandably, a lot of trouble noticing this. Given the pervasiveness of
fraud in this sector, MSCAs should not take information in EU importers’ supply chain traceability systems
about countries of mineral origin at face value. Making it mandatory to include the mine of mineral
origin in all supply chain traceability systems and supplying that information to MSCAs would facilitate
independent checks.
In order to fight fraud, the EU should amend Article 4 of the Regulation as to:
• require Union importers to provide in their supply chain traceability system the name of the
mine of mineral origin in all cases, no matter whether the minerals originate from previously
identified CAHRAs or whether other supply chain risks, as listed in the OECD Due Diligence
Guidance, have been ascertained.
5. Role of industry schemes and audits
• The EC should require thorough and transparent criteria regarding the use of industry
schemes and audits. Special attention should be paid to participation of civil society and
affected communities in audits, corrective action plans, development of standards, grievance
mechanisms, and governance structures;
• The EU should avoid overreliance on third-party audits and industry schemes. These should
be used as just one tool in a kit designed to verify compliance with responsible sourcing
obligations. The EU should include non-industry actors, including NGOs, in risk assessment
processes.
6. Public reporting and transparency on the implementation of the Regulation
More transparency on the implementation of the Regulation is crucial for third parties to evaluate the
effectiveness and learn from its weaknesses to improve impact. This is vital to the success of the 3TG
Regulation, but also very relevant for other due diligence Regulations that include many similar clauses.
We recommend the EU and the MSCAs to improve their public reporting, more specifically, we recommend
the EU and MSCAs to:
• Improve public communication about the Regulation’s implementation and effectiveness,
including for example the recognition process of industry schemes, by providing more
frequent updates;
• Encourage MSCAs to publicly disclose the list of Union importers under the Regulation as a
best practice;
• Ensure that the annual due diligence reports of all importers subject to the due diligence
obligations of the Regulation are publicly available and easily accessible;
24 25

RECOMMENDATIONS
• Take steps to make the following information more easily accessible to the public: mines of
mineral origin, and locations where minerals are consolidated, traded and processed. This
would help journalists and NGOs to perform their role of watchdogs. In this perspective,
the “transparency platform for downstream companies” announced by the EC is a welcome
development;
• Provide a public disaggregated dataset on 3TG imports into the EU.
7. Rules applicable to infringement and penalties
Without serious consequences for EU importers in case of non-compliance with the EU Regulation, the
effects in the entire supply chain will likely remain minimal.
To this end, we recommend the EU to:
• Harmonize the rules applicable to infringements of the Regulation across the EU to avoid
shopping between MSCAs. Rules applicable to infringements can include (temporary) import
bans, fines, and “naming and shaming” methods (publicly name companies that do not
comply with the Regulation);
• Ensure (conditional) fines are effective by fixing significant minimum fines (e.g., 50,000 EUR).
The EU Regulation states that, based on the findings of the ongoing review, the EC “shall assess whether
MSCAs should have competences to impose penalties upon Union importers in the event of persistent
failure to comply with the obligations set out in this Regulation”. We recommend the EC to:
• Submit a legislative proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council to grant MSCAs
competence to impose uniform and dissuasive penalties upon EU importers who persistently
fail to comply with the Regulation.
8. Alignment between the different EU due diligence regulations
There remain points of (potential) misalignment and overlap between all of the EU due diligence
initiatives. On top of that, there are points of misalignment between international and EU due diligence
initiatives. This creates a very confusing situation for EU companies and actors in producing countries. On
the one hand, we recommend the EU 3TG Regulation to at least include the more recent developments
(e.g., in the light of the green transition) integrated in other regulations. On the other hand, due diligence
Regulations currently in the drafting process should take lessons learned from the 3TG Regulation into
account.
There is a need for EU due diligence policy coherence, acknowledging that each initiative is at a different
stage in the legislative or implementation process. For the EU 3TG Regulation, it is necessary to align at
least with:
• The EU Battery Regulation and Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive: The
pertaining legal texts require companies to also manage negative environmental impacts, and
place more emphasis on remediation and reparation;
• The Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive: This legislative act will require large
companies to conduct due diligence, identify, publicly report, and counteract actual and
potential adverse human rights impacts along the entire supply chain.
26

26

28