FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
Battery Passport
Content Guidance
Achieving compliance with the EU Battery Regulation
and increasing sustainability and circularity
ID: 010101010
BATTERY G & In e C F M f P n a o o e a A r r o r n b m a t S u o p l a f n r S B a t i i n a c o P t t t n t u O e r r e R y r T M & C a & e C t i ffi r e o R c r m e u c ia s l i p e a l o s o r n u i s c t r i y c y ti e on
S D u u p e p D ly i l C ig h e a n i c n e P & e D rf u o r r a m b a il n it c y e ...
B C a o tt n e te ry n t P G as u s id p a o n rt ce
A E s c U u h s i B t e a a v i tt i n n e a g r b y c i l o R it m e y g p a u l n i l a a d n t i c c o i e r n c w a u n i l t a d h r i i t t n y h c . e reasing
Version 1.1 /
December 2023 THEBATTERYPASS.EU

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
QUESTION 1
What is a digital battery passport and from when will it be required? ......................................... 3
QUESTION 2
For which batteries will the digital battery passport be required? .................................................. 5
QUESTION 3
Who is responsible for the digital battery passport,
and when do they need to take action? .............................................................................................................. 9
QUESTION 4
Which information will be requested for the battery passport
and who will have access to it? .............................................................................................................................. 12
QUESTION 5
What value does the battery passport unlock? ........................................................................................... 16
QUESTION 6
How are circularity aspects considered for the battery passport? ................................................ 18
QUESTION 7
What supply chain due diligence information is included in the battery passport? ........ 20
QUESTION 8
Which performance and durability data attributes are in scope
of the battery passport? ............................................................................................................................................... 22
QUESTION 9
How is the battery carbon mfootprint calculated
and where can I find detailed guidance? .......................................................................................................... 25
QUESTION 10
How will remaining uncertainties regarding the battery passport be addressed? ............. 27
Further reading:
Battery Passport Content Guidance
and supporting documents
2

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 1
What is a digital battery passport
and from when will it be required?
The EU is introducing digital product passports (DPP) as part of its
broader regulatory ambition towards sustainability with the first being
required for batteries from 2027.
DPPs are included in the EU’s new Eco-design for Sustainable Products
Regulation (ESPR), which entered into force in July 2024. These passports are
digital records of a product that collect data along its entire lifecycle.
The information held in a DPP helps manufacturing and end-of-life processes
to be more sustainable and circular. It also supports consumers in making
informed choices. DPPs are key to advancing the European 'Twin Transition,'
aiming for a more sustainable, circular, and digital economy.
The battery passport is the first DPP to be introduced in Europe and will be
a detailed digital record of a battery's materials, components, and lifecycle.
This requirement comes from the EU Battery Regulation and will be mandatory
starting in February 2027.
3

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
The battery passport will be the first of a series of digital product passports
to be launched in the European Union
Objectives of DPPs
Provide transparency Shift from linear Create a level
to impact decisions to circular economies playing field
DPPs in the ESPR
The Eco-design for Sustainable Products Regulation (ESPR) includes the requirement that
„products can only be placed on the market or put into service if a digital product passport
is available“.
The Digital Battery Passport
Article 77 of the EU Battery Regulation mandates for batteries an
„electronic record (battery passport)“ from 18 February 2027.
4

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 2
For which batteries will the digital
battery passport be required?
The EU Battery Regulation outlines its requirements
for different battery categories.
According to Article 77(1), the battery passport will be mandatory from
February 2027 for batteries placed or put into service on the EU market
including:
• Electric vehicle (EV) batteries.
• Light means of transport (LMT) batteries, such as e-bikes and e-scooters.
• Industrial batteries with a capacity above 2 kWh, such as those used in
industrial activities, communication infrastructure or energy storage.
Further details on how the Battery Regulation defines different batteries are
shown on the back.
5

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Electric vehicle, light means of transport, and industrial batteries with
a capacity above 2 kWh will be in scope for the EU battery passport
Battery Battery
Battery categories
categories weight
Provide electric power for the traction to hybrid or electric vehicles
> 25 kg
• of categories L (Regulation (EU) No 168/2013), if larger than 25 kg, or
(category L)
Electric vehicle • of categories M, N or O (Regulation (EU) 2018/858)
(EV) battery
Provide electric power for traction to wheeled vehicles that can be powered
by the electric motor alone or by a combination of motor and human power
≤ 25 kg
Light means including type-approved vehicles of category L (Regulation (EU) No 168/2013),
of transport e.g., e-bikes and e-scooters
(LMT) battery
• Designed specifically for industrial uses, or
• intended for industrial uses after being subject to preparing for repurpose
or repurposing, or ≤ 25 kg
• any battery above 5 kg that is not an LMT, EV or SLI battery
• Industrial uses include (Recital 15)
Industrial
battery1 – i ndustrial activities – e nergy storage in private or domestic
– c ommunication environments
infrastructure – g eneration and distribution of electric energy
– a gricultural activities – traction in other transport vehicles incl. rail,
waterborne, aviation or off-road machinery
Sub-category: Stationary battery energy storage system
• Industrial battery with internal storage
• specifically designed to store and deliver electric energy from and into the
grid or store and deliver electric energy to end-users, regardless of where
and by whom this battery is being used
1) Only industrial batteries above 2 kWh within scope of battery passport
6

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Industrial batteries are characterised in different sub-categories
and a broad range of applications, with varying market conditions
and processes affecting the use cases
Battery category
Batteries Battery passport:
Within scope
Out of scope
Portable SLI LMT EV Industrial batteries
Designed/repurposed¹ for
industrial use / > 5 kg and
no other battery category
Industrial batteries with Industrial batteries with
capacity > 2 kWh capacity ≤ 2 kWh
Other industrial batteries
Used for traction and/or
other purposes
Stationary battery energy
storage systems Batteries with
Industrial battery
Deliver electric energy external storage
sub-category
to grid or end-users + (Redox-Flow)
internal storage
Electric
Heavy
logistics
machinery,
solutions,
e.g.
e.g.
excavator
forklifts
Time Standby/
shifting UPS, Non-road
Major Peak Forklifts dominate
and e.g. transport,
applications² shaving industrial traction
arbitrage hospital e.g. rail
batteries market³
trading UPS
Grid-scale UPS =
Industrial-scale Uninterruptible
Small-scale (Home Storage Power Supply
= only major B2C application
for industrial batteries)
1) A number of industrial batteries may be repurposed batteries (e.g. a former EV battery is repurposed into an industrial
battery). However, repurposing used industrial batteries is a less likely scenario.
2) Market conditions and processes (e.g. servicing processes) can vary among industrial batteries applications, resulting in an
impact on the applicability of the overall use case assessment.
3) cf. Global Market Insights Report (2023)
7

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Overview of the hierarchy of battery definitions
Battery
Pack Module Cell
Major general Grouping of batteries based
characteristics on production
Battery category
Discern different use categories
(e.g., EV, industrial…) Battery model
All batches and individual batteries within
a model share the same technical characteristics
Battery chemistry
Active materials in anode, cathode,
and electrolyte
Battery Battery Battery
batch batch batch
Internal vs. external storage Consistently manufactured group of batteries within
Energy stored within the battery or a model, identifiable by a batch identification code
in one or more external devices (e.g.,
redox flow)
Rechargeable vs non-rechargeable Particular / individual batteries
(Not) designed to be electrically
recharged Singular battery, identifiable by product serial
number with an individual use phase
8

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 3
Who is responsible for the
digital battery passport, and when
do they need to take action?
The economic operator who places the battery on the market or
puts it into service is responsible for meeting the battery passport
requirements. This can be either the manufacturer or the importer.
The term ‘manufacturer’ refers to any natural or legal person that
manufactures a battery or has a battery designed or manufactured and
markets that battery under its own name or trademark or puts it into service
for its own purposes. The ‘importer’ is established within the EU and places a
battery on the market from a third country. The economic operator is explicitly
allowed to authorise another operator “to act on their behalf”.
For example, if an EU-based car manufacturer buys battery cells and
assembles them into an electric vehicle battery, they are considered the
manufacturer and thus the economic operator responsible for the battery
passport.
The main responsibilities for the battery passport include creating a new
battery passport, as well as updating and storing the information within it.
9

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Either the “manufacturer” or “importer” are responsible for the battery passport
Fulfils definition
of EV battery
or LMT battery Yes Battery put into No Battery placed Online Online seller
Start service? (for on the market established in
or industrial
own purpose) on- or offline? the EU?
battery above
2 kWh
No battery
passport
needed
10
No
Manufacturer /
Importer1
Yes Offline
Battery placed
Battery
on market from
marketed to EU
in- or outside
Customers?
EU?
No
Yes
Inside Outside Yes No
rerutcafunaM retropmI / rerutcafunaM 2retropmI yrettab
oN
dedeen
tropssap
1) Battery Pass understanding, not clearly defined in Battery Regulation
2) Depending on who is targeting EU consumers

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Core responsibilities for the battery passport comprise the issuing of
a (new) battery passport as well as updating and storing the information
Mining Refining Precursor and CAM Battery cells and
modules
Cfrroema ttehde bNyo aurnt Psrhoojepct Recycling Cfrroema ttehde bNyo suann Pdrroaject pass B p a o tt rt e c r e y a ses Su ( p S p t l a y ti c c h d a a in ta d ) ata Battery pack
to exist
Cfrroema ttehde bNyo Iunne sP rSoimjeocets
Preparation for Battery Putting into service
recycling passport Placing on the market
e.g., dismantling
New battery passport
R P re e r - e m u p s a a e n r a u ( t i f n i a o c 2 n t n u f d o r l i r i n f e g ) R In e cl - . u m s a e intenance 2nd life U ( s D e y p n h a a m se ic d d a a ta ta) 1st life Cfrroema ttehde bNyo Eurns iPnroject R In U e cl - p . u m d s a a e i t n e tenance P Pl u a tt c i i n n g g i o n n t o t h s e e r m vi a c r e k et
and repair and repair
Update
Putting into service Remanufacturing
Placing on the market Preparation for re-use
New battery passport Repurposing
Incl. preparation
New battery passport Putting into service for repurposing
Placing on the market
1) Treatment of manufacturing and processing waste as well as collection and transport can occur between all activities
within the value chain
11

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 4
Which information will be
requested for the battery passport
and who will have access to it?
The EU Battery Regulation requires a wide range of data attributes to
be included in the battery passport. For EV batteries alone, Article 77
and Annex XIII outline around 80 mandatory data attributes covering
the entire battery lifecycle.
The Battery Pass consortium has organised the data attributes into seven
content clusters along the battery life cycle:
1. General battery and manufacturer information
2. Compliance, labels, certifications
3. Battery carbon footprint
4. Supply chain due diligence
5. Battery materials and composition
6. Circularity and resource efficiency
7. Performance and durability
The data attributes can be related to the battery model or specific to the
individual battery. For the technical implementation, they can also be
differentiated by as “static” (unchanging or not changing often) or “dynamic”
(changing often over time).
12

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
In addition, data is differentiated by the actors who can access it, allowing data confidentiality.
For this purpose different groups are defined for restricted data access:
Access groups : Battery categories :
Public All batteries below
Persons with a legitimate interest EV batteries (if BMS is used1)
Notified bodies, market surveillance authorities LMT batteries (if BMS is used1)
Persons with a legitimate interest and Industrial batteries incl. stationary energy
Commission storage systems2 > 2 kWh
Stationary battery energy storage systems
> 2 kWh
Topic Subtopic
Identifiers and product data (if applicable)
Battery passport identifier (recommended) Date of putting battery into service
(where appropriate)
Battery identifier
Operator identifier and information
Warranty period of the battery
(recommended) Battery Warranty period of the battery
Manufacturer identifier and information Battery mass
Manufacturing place Battery status
Manufacturing date
Symbols, labels and documentation of conformity
Separate collection symbol Meaning of labels and symbols
Symbols for cadmium and lead EU declaration of conformity
Carbon footprint label Results of test reports proving compliance
Extinguishing agent
13
ataD
citatS
• the “general public”
• “ notified bodies, market surveillance authorities and the [European] Commission”
• “ any natural or legal person with a legitimate interest”. Particularly the last category will
be specified further by the European Commission through an Implementing Act due latest
by August 2026.
You can find a detailed overview of the information held in the battery passport by battery
categories and access groups below. Please note that this overview has been updated to
reflect the names and characteristics of the data attributes as included in the DIN DKE Spec
99100 (to be published in Autumn 2024), and therefore differs from Figure 13 shown in the
Battery Passport Content Guidance (p.61).
Battery passport information by battery categories and access groups

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Topic Subtopic
Battery carbon footprint (if applicable)
Overall battery carbon footprint per Carbon footprint of distribution lifecycle
functional unit stage
Carbon footprint of raw material acqui- Web link to public carbon footprint study
sition and pre-processing lifecycle stage
General battery and manufacturer
Carbon footprint of main product information
production / manufacturing lifecycle stage
Absolute battery carbon footprint
Carbon footprint performance class (recommended)
Supply chain due diligence
Information of due diligence report Supply chain indices (recommended)
Third-party assurances of recognised
schemes (recommended)
Battery materials and composition
Battery chemistry Hazardous substances
Critical raw materials Impact of substances on environment,
human health, safety, persons
Materials used in cathode, anode and
electrolyte
Circularity and resource efficiency
Dismantling information: Manuals for the E-mail address of sources for spare parts
removal and the disassembly of the battery
pack
Web address of sources for spare parts
Circularity
Part numbers for components
Safety measures information
Postal address of sources for spare parts
Pre-consumer recycled content share of Post-consumer recycled content share of Recycled &
Ni/Co/Li/Pb Ni/Co/Li/Pb renewable
content
Renewable content share
Information on the role of end-users in Information on the separate collection, Role of
contributing to waste prevention the take back, collection points and end-user
preparation for re-use, preparation for in waste
Information on the role of end-users in repurposing and treatment available for prevention
contributing to separate collection of waste batteries and
waste batteries collection
Performance & Durability
Rated capacity Remaining capacity
Capacity fade Remaining usable battery energy
Capacity,
(recommended)
Certified usable battery energy energy and
(recommended) State of certified energy (SOCE) voltage
Minimal, nominal and maximum voltage, State of charge (SoC)
with temperature ranges when relevant
14
ataD
citatS
ataD
cimanyD

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Topic Subtopic
Performance & Durability (cont'd) (if applicable)
Original power capability Where possible, remaining power
capability
Power fade
Power
Maximum permitted battery power
Capability
Ratio between nominal battery power and
battery energy (recommended)
Initial round trip energy efficiency Where possible, remaining round trip
energy efficiency Energy
Where applicable, round trip energy
round trip
efficiency fade Current self-discharge rate
efficiency,
Round trip energy efficiency at 50% of E volution of self-discharge rate Self-
cycle life (recommended) discharge
Initial self-discharge rate
Internal battery resistance (cell & pack)
Internal
I nternal resistance increase (pack; cell/
Resistance
module recommended)
Expected lifetime in calendar years N umber of full charging and discharging
cycles
Commercial warranty period
E xpected lifetime: Number of charge-
Capacity throughput
Battery
discharge cycles Energy throughput
lifetime
Cycle-life Reference test
C-rate of relevant cycle-life test
Capacity threshold for exhaustion
T emperature range idle state (lower Temperature information
boundary)
T ime spent charging during extreme Temperature
T emperature range idle state (upper temperatures conditions
boundary)
Time spent in extreme temperatures
N umber of deep discharge events
(recommended for EV, industrial)
Negative
N umber of overcharge events (recommended) events
Information on accidents
1) BMS limitation: Data specified for all battery categories must be reported regardless of BMS use
2) Category listed as part of entire battery passport scope. No data attribute applies solely to this battery category
Please refer to the DIN DKE Spec 99100 text and the Excel document “Battery Passport Data Longlist” for more information.
15
ataD
citatS
ataD
cimanyD

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 5
What value does the digital
battery passport unlock?
With the battery passport, transparency is created by making
comprehensive data available to different actors along the battery life
cycle. It is not only a regulatory compliance tool benefitting market
surveillance authorities. By closing existing information asymmetries,
the battery passport will unlock major value to industry and society
alike.
Based on the respective data, informed decisions can be taken, processes be
improved, and circular business models enabled – all together leading to an
increase in economic value as well as a reduction in negative environmental
and social impacts.
To learn more, read ‘The Value of the EU
Battery Passport’, published in April 2023.
thebatterypass.eu
The Value of the
EU Battery Passport
Version 0.9
An exploratory assessment
of economic, environmental
and social benefits
April 2024
Full document Executive Summary
16

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Battery Pass will be releasing a further publication on the expected value of the EU battery
passport in late 2024. This will include further analysis on specific considerations for light
means of transport (LMTs), an assessment of the required implementation efforts, and a
synthesis of the benefits of the battery passport and outlook on Digital Product Passports
(DPPs) in general.
Direct use cases of the battery passport mainly unlock value along the
downstream value chain
Value of the passport: Potential additional value beyond regulatory compli ance pending conditions beyond
regulatory requirements (see “potential” use cases)
Direct value add along several dimensions (environmental, social and economic)
Precursor and
Mining Refining CAM production
Cfrroema ttehde bNyo aurnt Psrhoojepct
Cfrroema ttehde bNyo suann Pdrroaject
Recycling BATTERY PASS Cells and modules
“More efficient recycling” No- SZ41621956 manufacturing
“Simplified residual value determination” Cfrroema ttehde bNyo Iunne sP rSoimjeocets Cfrroema ttehde bNyo Puent ePrro vjaenct Driel
Collection Pack assembly and integration
“Precise risk assessment for transport” “Reliable communication of ESG data”
“Simplified residual value determination” Cfrroema ttehde bNyo Vuenc Ptroorjsetcatll Cfrroema ttehde bNyo Eurns iPnroject
Re-use, remanufacture or repurpose Usage
“Informed purchasing decisions” “Informed purchasing decisions”
“Eased servicing” “Eased servicing”
“Simplified residual value determination” “Simplified residual value determination”
“Streamlined trade of used and waste batteries “Streamlined trade of used and waste batteries
through marketplaces” through marketplaces”
17

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 6
How are circularity
aspects considered for
the battery passport?
The information requirements of the battery passport are aimed at
boosting repurposing efforts as well as the efficiency of collection,
dismantling and recycling of batteries and the recovery of raw materials.
The battery passport requires four types of circularity information:
1. Recycled and renewable content: The battery passport must specify the
recycled content share of cobalt, lithium, lead, and nickel, as well as the
renewable content share. The Battery Pass consortium also recommends
calculating and declaring pre- and post-consumer shares.
2. Materials and composition: To support second-life uses, the battery
passport must include information on the general and detailed composition
of the battery (with restricted data access), hazardous substances, as well
as key symbols and their meaning.
3. Removability / replaceability: Information on how to dismantle batteries,
details about spare parts and suppliers, and safety measures must be
included to help manage used or waste batteries.
4. End-of-life information: The battery passport must provide information on
the separate disposal of waste batteries, as well as details on take-back
and collection points to improve collection rates.
18

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Overview of battery passport circularity information
Battery materials and composition
Recycled and Cfrroema ttehde bNyo Iunne sP rSoimjeocets • General and detailed composition
renewable content
BATTERY PASS • Hazardous substances and their impact
• R ecycled content share No- SZ41621956 • Key symbols and their meaning
of cobalt, lithium, nickel
• R enewable content share
End-of-life information Dismantling information
• I nformation on separate • Dismantling information (manual
disposal of waste batteries for the battery removal and
• I nformation on end-user role in manual for the disassembly)
waste collection and prevention • Information on spare parts and
• I nformation on take-back suppliers
• I nformation on collection points • Part numbers of components
• Safety measures
19

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 7
What supply chain due
diligence information is included
in the battery passport?
For the battery passport, the EU Battery Regulation requires economic
operators to publicly share the information in their due diligence
reports. The Battery Pass consortium recommends aligning this
report with the due diligence requirements of other regulations and
considering whether key parts of the report should be presented as
individual data points, rather than just a PDF link.
The regulation only mandates the due diligence report for the battery
passport. However, the Battery Pass consortium further explored the content,
potential harmonisation with other legislation and additional voluntary supply
chain due diligence information for the battery passport.
As a result, Battery Pass recommends including additional voluntary
information in the report. This could involve third-party supply chain
assurances, supply chain indices like those developed by the Global Battery
Alliance, as well as information about the origins of the battery materials.
For further information,
see also section 6.4
of the Battery Passport
Content Guidance.
20

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Information of the due diligence report is the only mandatory
battery passport data point for responsible supply chains
The due diligence report
The due diligence report, made available via the battery passport, shall provide documentation
on three main elements (based on the 5-step OECD framework):
Annual report on due diligence policies
(Art. 52)
Economic operator’s Third-party verification of
Risk management plan
management system battery DD policies
(Art. 50)
(Art. 49) (Art. 51)
21

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 8
Which performance and durability
data attributes are in scope
of the battery passport?
The battery passport requires information on around 40 different
performance and durability data attributes. These include information
on battery energy/capacity, power, resistance, and the number of
charge and discharge cycles. It also requires reporting on temperature
conditions and negative events the battery encounters during its use.
The battery passport separates data into static (pre-use) and dynamic (in-use)
categories.
• Static data points provide information about the battery model and
are mostly publicly available.
• Dynamic data points pertain to individual batteries and are accessible only
to persons with a legitimate interest.
The EU Battery Regulation also distinguishes some of the requirements by
the different battery categories such as electric vehicles, stationary battery
storage systems and LMT batteries.
22

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Please note that the list of data attributes below has been updated to reflect the information
as included in the DIN DKE Spec 99100 (to be published in late 2024), and therefore differs
from Figure 13 shown in the Battery Passport Content Guidance (p.61).
Access groups : Battery categories :
Public All batteries
Interested persons EV batteries (if BMS is used)
LMT batteries (if BMS is used)
Industrial batteries incl. stationary ESS > 2 kWh
Stationary BEES > 2 kWh
Topic Subtopic
Performance data attributes
Rated capacity Remaining capacity
Capacity fade Certified usable battery energy
(recommended) Capacity,
Certified usable battery energy
energy and
(recommended) State of certified energy (SOCE)
voltage
Minimal, nominal and maximum voltage, State of charge (SoC)
with temperature ranges when relevant
Original power capability Where possible, remaining power
capability
Power fade
Power
Maximum permitted battery power Capability
Ratio between nominal battery power and
battery energy (recommended)
Initial round trip energy efficiency Where possible, remaining round trip
energy efficiency
Where applicable, round trip energy Energy
efficiency fade Current self-discharge rate round trip
(recommended) efficiency
Round trip energy efficiency at 50% of
Self-
cycle life Evolution of self-discharge rate
discharge
(recommended)
Initial self-discharge rate
Internal battery resistance (cell & pack)
Internal resistance increase (pack; cell/ Internal
module recommended) Resistance
23
ataD
citatS
Around 40 performance and durability data attributes are required for the Battery
Passport, while detailed descriptions are falling short in the Battery Regulation
aattaaDD
cciimmaannyyDD

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Topic Subtopic
Durability data attributes
Expected lifetime in calendar years Number of full charge-discharge cycles
Commercial warranty period Capacity throughput
Expected lifetime in number of charge- Energy throughput
discharge cycles Battery
lifetime
Cycle-life reference test
C-rate of relevant cycle-life test
Capacity threshold for exhaustion
Temperature range idle state Temperature information
(lower boundary)
Time spent charging during extreme Temperature
Temperature range idle state temperatures conditions
(upper boundary)
Time spent in extreme temperatures
Number of deep discharge events
(voluntary for EV, industrial )
Negative
Number of overcharge events
events
(recommended)
Information on accidents
24
ataD
citatS
aattaaDD
cciimmaannyyDD

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 9
How is the battery carbon
footprint calculated and where
can I find detailed guidance?
The carbon footprint of a battery is calculated by collecting data on
activities such as energy use and materials and then multiplying these
by their respective emissions factors. These figures are combined to create
carbon footprints for each production process of the material or component.
The carbon footprint must be calculated for four stages of the battery’s lifecycle:
1. Raw material acquisition and pre-processing,
2. Manufacturing,
3. Distribution,
4. End-of-life and recycling.
For the Manufacturing and Distribution stages, the draft Delegated Act
establishing the methodology for the calculation and verification of the carbon
footprint of EV batteries requires using company-specific activity data. For
‘most relevant processes’ in the other stages, secondary data may be used,
but the Battery Pass consortium recommends using company-specific data.
While the EU Delegated Act must be complied with, the Global Battery Alliance
GHG Rulebook and the Battery Pass Carbon Footprint Rules provide guidance on
how to measure carbon footprints for each production step in the lifecycle stages.
25

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Company-specific activity data are required for the Manufacturing and
Distribution stages in the battery carbon footprint declaration
Legend: Primary activity data voluntary for most relevant processes as per draft delegated act for EV batteries
carbon footprint section 2.3 and 2.3.1 (EU COM 2024)
Primary activity data mandatory as per draft delegated act for EV batteries carbon footprint section 2.3
and 2.3.1 (EU COM 2024)
Raw material Manufacturing Distribution End-of-life and
acquisition and stage stage recycling stage
pre-processing stage
Primary activity data Primary activity data mandatory Primary Primary activity data
voluntary for ‘most activity data voluntary for ‘most
relevant processes’ voluntary relevant processes’
for ‘most
relevant
processes’
26
]noitalugeR
rep
epocs
fo
tuO[
esU
Battery Pass Carbon
Footprint Rules
EU Commission Draft Global Battery Alliance (included in GBA
Delegated Act GHG Rulebook Rulebook v2.0)
pCAM CAM
production production
Mining
and Anode
refining active Anode Electrode Module Collection Recycling
active and cell and Distribu-
material and and
material manufac- battery tion
precursor dismantling Disposal production turing assembly
production
Other cell Other battery
components components
production manufac-
(e.g. elec- turing (e.g.
trolyte) housing)
Cradle-to-grave: The calculation shall comply with the “Commission Delegated Regulation
supplementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 (…) by establishing the methodology for the
calculation and verification of the carbon footprint of electric vehicle batteries”
Cradle-to-Grave: GBA GHG Rulebook v2.0 including Battery Pass CF Rules
‘Company-specific dataset’ means (…) a company-specific process, where all the activity data are company-specific, and which relates to a
specific battery model produced in a specific production plant;
‘Most relevant processes’: pCAM, anode active material precursors, electrolyte slat and precursors, copper, aluminium, steel, battery recycling
(section 2.3 and 2.3.2 of EU COM 2024).
EU COM (2024): Batteries for electric vehicles – carbon footprint methodology

FAST FACTS CONTENT GUIDANCE
QUESTION 10
How will remaining uncertainties
regarding the battery passport
be addressed?
The EU Battery Regulation will be supplemented with further
methodological development – especially through around 50 Delegated
and Implementing Acts. Some of these will be published by the
European Commission (EC) by a certain date, others can be adopted
under certain circumstances at the EC’s discretion.
The Acts, known as the Secondary Legislation, will complete the Battery
Regulation in detail; ensuring uniform conditions, calculations and
verifications. Others will amend the Regulation based on market developments
or technical and scientific progress. Topics covered concern, among others:
1. Carbon footprint (CF): Delegated Acts to establish the CF methodology,
performance classes and threshold as well as Implementing Acts that
specify the formats of these
2. Circularity: Delegated Acts to specify methodology for recycled content
3. Performance and durability: Delegated Acts to establish minimum values
for electrochemical performance
4. Battery passport access: Implementing Acts to specify access rights
5. Reporting to the Commission: Implementing Act to harmonise format of
data and information to be reported
27

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Learn more about the Secondary Legislation
following the EU Battery Regulation in this overview
In addition, the Ecodesign for Sustainable Products Regulation (ESPR) describes further
details on technical aspects of DPP implementation (including the Battery Passport).
Standardisation efforts for DPPs – being carried out by CEN-CENELEC in JTC24 – are ongoing
in the context of the ESPR, which entered into force in July 2024. The details of these
technical specifications on the ‘operating system’ of DPPs include e.g. data carriers and data
exchange and are thus crucial for the implementation.
A digital product passport (DPP) consists of data and a system
DPP Data DPP System (addressed in ESPR)
DPP data sector specific for: Harmonized technical system for all DPPs:
· Batteries BATTER SD G&ICFnY u uo eafM p o e n or Pa p rebtD mn l rA pyoa i u l al ir S C fn g tai Bi henoSca an ntt tP ic ut n e e rOer yrRT M&C&eP& I ffi e iarCR D Drctecf o u euo : ism r r e lroa ia 0 mn ap burl cio1 irs atylcsy in 0 tei cy t1i e o0n101 . 0 ..
· · · T E C e l o e x n c t s i t l t r e r o s u n c ic ti s o n Materials B IV Ror C ne e fu r cc t s l oye a h io a lcs l e nal ib f 1 tt n‘oD r .o1 gr r i a ’ / s b c t tliD ai e o rf e il nebc c o w u e uc r mi ltyt ai hc b n o y t e lin ten rh ’ g 2e sa 0 tG tn F 2 ah l d 3oge be‘ o a ECsl n a B dro a b- tt oo e D fn L t rB - y l F A i a p f o o a l e ltt o i a at nt r n pn ec rd a e ii g r nn y t lA i P t stta t ssrpibo BA ru T t TE t R SD G&ICFnY ou uaef e Mopr o e nbt Pa p re pDomn l rA yrna i uil al ni S C f g taB ti he oSca an nttP ic ut n e e rOer yrRT M&C&eP& I ffi e iarCR D Drctecf o u euo : ism r r e lroa ia 0 mn ap burl cio1 irs atylcsy in 0 tei cy t1i e o0n101 . 0 .. Data Storage Data Carrier Trust/Security/
IVne rcsoiollna b1.o1r a/t iDoenc wemithb etrh 2e0 G2l3obal Battery Alliance Identifier Sovereignty/
Access
→ Defined in different regulations and secondary
legislation (e.g., the Battery Regulation with
further information available in the Battery Pass
Content Guidance)
Data Exchange IT Services/ Workflows and
APIs Data Processing
28

THEBATTERYPASS.EU
Further reading:
Battery Passport Content Guidance and supporting documents
Content Data Attribute Carbon Footprint EOL Allocation
Guidance Longlist Rules Analysis
CONSORTIUM LEAD
CONSORTIUM PARTNERS
*under subcontract
This project receives funding from the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Climate Action by resolution of the German Bundestag under grant agreement No BZF335.