China’s Role in Supplying
Critical Minerals for the
Rodrigo Castillo
Global Energy Transition
Caitlin Purdy
What Could the Future Hold?
July 2022

ABOUT THE LTRC PROJECT
The Leveraging Transparency to Reduce Corruption project (LTRC)
is a global action research initiative led by the Brookings Institution
and Results for Development to reduce corruption along the
natural resource value chain. LTRC takes a systems approach that
is grounded in evidence, extensive stakeholder consultations, and
fieldwork. Through research, knowledge brokerage, and testing of new
tactics, LTRC aims to identify, co-develop, and inform strategies and
interventions that complement and strengthen the efforts of diverse
good governance and anti-corruption actors who engage with the
extractives sector at the global, national, and subnational levels.
ABOUT THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION
The Brookings Institution is a nonprofit organization devoted to
independent research and policy solutions. Its mission is to conduct
high-quality, independent research and, based on that research, to
provide innovative, practical recommendations for policymakers and
the public. The conclusions and recommendations of any Brookings
publication are solely those of its author(s) and do not reflect the views
of the Institution, its management, or its other scholars.
ABOUT RESULTS FOR DEVELOPMENT
Results for Development (R4D) is a leading nonprofit global
development partner. R4D collaborates with change agents around
the world—governments, civil society, and innovators—to create
strong systems that support healthy, educated people. R4D combines
global expertise in health, education, and nutrition with analytic rigor,
practical support for decision-making and implementation, and access
to peer problem-solving networks.

Contents
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................................2
1 Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................4
2 China’s Role in Critical Minerals Supply Chains .........................................................................................6
3 Efforts to Reduce Dependence on China for Critical Minerals .............................................................9
3.1 Political Challenges and Stakeholder Opposition to Onshore Mining Development ..........10
3.2 Limited Investment in Mineral Refining and Smelting ...................................................................12
3.3 Limited Cell Component and Battery Manufacturing Capacities ...............................................13
4 Will China Tighten Due Diligence on Critical Minerals Supply Chains? .............................................15
4.1 Responsible Business Developments in China ................................................................................15
4.2 Evolving Responsible Sourcing Expectations in the U.S. and EU ...............................................17
5 What Could the Future Look Like? ..............................................................................................................19
High vs. Low Supply Chain Due Diligence by China ..............................................................................19
High vs. Low Control of Supply Chains by China ....................................................................................20
6 Conclusion .......................................................................................................................................................28
About the Authors ...................................................................................................................................................30
References .................................................................................................................................................................31
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 1

Executive Summary
The world faces major challenges in responsibly sourcing large quantities of minerals that
are critical for the transition to low-carbon energy sources. Consumption of these critical
minerals—most notably nickel, copper, lithium, and cobalt—is projected to rise, largely driven by
their use in the renewable energy sector. Demand is expected to quadruple by 2040 under the
International Energy Agency’s Sustainable Development Scenario, in which global action would
limit the global temperature rise to well below 2°C, and it is projected to rise by six times under a
net-zero scenario.1 Many governments, including the United States, European Union members,
and China, seem to share the goal of increasing the supply and rate of production of the raw
materials needed for the energy transition to address the challenge of global climate change.
However, meeting this demand will be difficult—and producing these minerals in strict adherence
to robust environmental, social, and governance criteria will be even more so.
China is the dominant player in global mineral processing. This report analyzes how its strategic
position in regard to critical minerals may evolve, to shed light on current and emerging
challenges for the energy transition, given the country’s high level of engagement in global
mineral supply chains.
Two major factors are likely to influence dynamics around responsible sourcing of critical
minerals for the energy transition. This first factor is China’s level of dominance across critical
minerals supply chains. There is growing concern that a high level of dependence on China
for these minerals and their derivative products may create energy security risks.2,3 Other
governments, notably in the U.S. and Europe, have moved to build out their own critical minerals
supply chains, creating uncertainty about whether China will maintain its dominant position. The
second factor is the level of enforcement of due diligence requirements in China’s mineral sector
and midstream and downstream industries (e.g., refiners or original equipment manufacturers) to
make these supply chains “cleaner” and “greener.” Comprehensive, globally aligned due diligence
requirements are needed to ensure that the sourcing of minerals needed for the energy transition
does not cause or contribute to adverse social and environmental impacts. These two factors will
likely shape the future of critical minerals supply chains.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 2

A best-case scenario would be characterized by geographic diversification of critical minerals
supply chains, coupled with globally aligned statutory due diligence requirements to make these
supply chains cleaner and greener. This would see the U.S. and Europe making considerable
investments in and successfully building out their critical minerals supply chains, from mining
to battery manufacturing. It would also entail China instituting mandatory due diligence
requirements on critical minerals sourcing and global coordination among major players,
including Beijing, Washington, and Brussels, to align these requirements. This would ensure a
stable supply of cleaner and greener critical minerals for the energy transition and minimize
the risk of the energy transition being disrupted due to price volatility, geopolitical tensions, or
logistical issues in supply chains.
As things stand, this best-case scenario looks unlikely. Considerable investment would be needed
to build out critical minerals supply chains in the U.S. and Europe. Current planning, including
that undertaken by the Biden administration in the U.S., is a step in the right direction, but it is
unclear whether it is commensurate with the scale of the challenge.
Moreover, China shows few signs of moving toward mandatory due diligence requirements for
critical minerals and their derivative products. It has taken some steps to strengthen due diligence
in the past decade, but key standards, many of which are voluntary, remain unenforced. This
means that broad transparency across critical minerals supply chains globally will be difficult to
achieve, given the critical role of Chinese actors, particularly in the midstream.
A worst-case scenario would see continued reliance on China for critical minerals and their
derivative products. This would expose the energy transition to major geopolitical risks, as well
as increase the risk that sourcing of critical minerals will cause or contribute to serious social or
environmental harms.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 3

1 Introduction
This report from the Leveraging Transparency to Reduce Corruption project (LTRC) explores
four potential scenarios for China’s role in critical minerals supply chains over the next 20
years, considering two key factors that are likely to influence dynamics around sourcing of critical
minerals for the energy transition: 1) the extent to which China retains a dominant position in
these supply chains and 2) whether China’s mineral sector and midstream and downstream
industries (e.g., refiners or original equipment manufacturers) move to make these supply chains
“cleaner” and “greener” by tightening due diligence requirements. The report describes what each
scenario could mean for the global energy transition, and specifically whether the world would
have access to the stable and clean supply of critical minerals it would need to meet ambitious
decarbonization goals.
Minerals undergo a complex, multi-stage transformation for use in applications such as
rechargeable electric batteries. First, raw minerals are mined from deposits. This mining activity,
known as upstream operations, is heavily concentrated in a set of resource-rich countries. The
minerals are then sold to traders or directly to smelters or refiners, mostly located in China.
Chemical refining and processing, known as midstream operations, transform the minerals into
fine particles with high purity levels and make them suitable for use in battery-grade products.
In the late midstream stage, manufacturers use these refined products to manufacture major
battery cell components—namely cathodes, anodes, and collectors. These cell components
are then assembled by downstream actors into modules within battery packs, which are used
in applications such as electric vehicles (EVs). For simplicity, we broadly refer to the products at
the various stages of the process from smelting to the manufacturing of battery cells and their
components as critical minerals products in this paper.
As critical minerals move along the value chain, the companies that acquire them may undertake
due diligence to assess whether they have been responsibly mined and processed. Due diligence
refers to the process through which companies identify, prevent, mitigate, and account for
how they address actual and potential adverse social and environmental impacts.4 International
organizations and industry associations have set out several different due diligence schemes.
In some jurisdictions, notably in Europe, governments are instituting mandatory due diligence
requirements for companies.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 4

Effective due diligence across critical minerals supply chains serves two main purposes. First, it
supports efforts to ensure that the extraction and trade of these minerals has positive impacts
on society and contributes to sustainable development. Second, it reduces the risk that their
extraction and trade will contribute to social and environmental harms, including labor abuses,
corruption, and conflict. In this paper, we use the terms cleaner and greener to describe critical
minerals that have been subject to due diligence processes and are therefore less likely to have
caused, contributed to, or been linked to adverse impacts. It is important to note that there are no
perfectly “clean” or “green” critical minerals or critical minerals products. Rather, there is a wide
spectrum, with minerals that cause major and multiple adverse impacts on one end and minerals
that have been responsibly and sustainably mined and processed on the other. Mandatory,
rigorous, and widespread due diligence is critical to ensuring that the energy transition—which will
require large volumes of critical minerals—does not cause adverse impacts globally.
China currently controls most global critical minerals refining, and its upstream control of
raw commodities is also increasing. Crucially, it controls much of the world’s EV battery
manufacturing, as well as the manufacturing of wind turbines, solar panels, energy storage, and
electric transmission, among other applications. As things stand, the world is highly dependent
on sourcing from China to advance the energy transition and meet decarbonization goals. The
sheer influence and impact of a single player calls for an assessment of the risks and challenges
it may pose for the energy transition, as well as potential pathways to address them in the critical
minerals supply chain.*
A consensus is growing about the risks to energy security posed by concentration of various
stages of critical minerals supply chains. The International Energy Agency (IEA) has highlighted
the high geographic concentration of production—including the high concentration of
processing operations in China—as a key vulnerability for the energy transition.5 Other
international organizations have also identified concentration of producers as a source of risk for
the energy transition “should investments in production capacity not meet demand, or in case
of potential geopolitical risk inside or between producer nations.”6 Similarly, the European Union
and the United States have recognized dependence on China for critical inputs and technologies
as a major reason to increase their mineral supply chain resilience.7
The next section sets out China’s role in critical minerals supply chains. Section 3 explores the
West’s bid to build out its own critical minerals supply chain to reduce Chinese dominance.
Section 4 explores the question of whether China will tighten due diligence requirements on
these supply chains. Section 5 undertakes a scenario analysis to consider how dynamics may
evolve over the next 20 years.
* A nonpartisan consensus has emerged among the U.S., EU, and many international forums, such as the IEA, that the concentra-
tion of the critical minerals supply chain creates energy security risks in the context of the energy transition. We recognize that
the Chinese government and the Chinese private sector may have a different perspective.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 5

2 China’s Role in Critical
Minerals Supply Chains
China dominates the midstream and
downstream of critical minerals supply
chains but not upstream production.
China is the dominant global player in refining strategic minerals. It refines 68% of nickel
globally, 40% of copper, 59% of lithium, and 73% of cobalt.8,9 It is also a strategic player in
later stages of the supply chain, such as manufacturing of battery cell components. It accounts
for most of the global production of mineral-rich components for battery cells, including 70%
of cathodes, which are the most important component and can account for half the cost of a
manufactured cell, 85% of anodes, 66% of separators, and 62% of electrolytes10,11 Most notably,
China holds 78% of the world’s cell manufacturing capacity for EV batteries, which are then
assembled into modules that are used to form a battery pack. The country also hosts three-
fourths of the world’s lithium-ion battery megafactories.12 This makes China the largest consumer
of the minerals it refines.
Given tight mineral supplies, actors ranging from manufacturers to refiners are now targeting
mining projects as part of their investment strategies to secure raw minerals. Foreign investments
and agreements on future demand for minerals, often in the form of joint venture and strategic
cooperation agreements, show the strong dependency on China’s mineral processing operations
and manufacturing capacities. For example, European and U.S. automakers have shown interest
in collaborating with Chinese companies. Volkswagen recently announced that it will form a
joint venture with Huayou Cobalt in southwestern Guangxi Province, China, and with Tsingshan
Holding Group in Indonesia to secure nickel and cobalt supplies.13 Similarly, Ganfeng Lithium
signed a long-term supply agreement with BMW and strategic cooperation agreements with
Tesla and Volkswagen.14
While China has a clear downstream competitive advantage, it does not dominate the upstream
for critical minerals. Australia and Chile host more than 70% of global lithium extraction, and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) hosts nearly 70% of cobalt extraction. In the case of
nickel extraction, Indonesia is the largest source, with more than 30% of the global share. For
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 6

copper extraction, Chile and Peru, the two largest players, account for more than 40% of the
global share.15 At a domestic level, China has recently invested in increasing its domestic mined
lithium output, especially in Qinghai Province; but despite widespread government support
and investments, the region has failed to significantly ramp up production, largely due to high
waste-disposal costs.16,17 While Chinese mining companies like Zijin Mining are trying to speed
up construction of other domestic mine sites, such as the Xiangyuan Lithium Polymetallic Mine
in Hunan Province,18 China extracts less than 10% of the global market for both copper and
lithium domestically.19 (This does not account for Chinese companies or partly Chinese-owned
companies overseas.) China is by far the world’s leading producer and processor of rare earth
elements (REEs), which are used in motor technologies for EVs and wind power technologies.
(See Box 1.)
With demand for critical minerals rapidly increasing, Chinese companies are striking new deals
for minerals globally to secure raw mineral inputs for refining and battery manufacturing. This
includes direct investments in mining projects and companies, part-equity-stake deals, and
extended supply sales agreements with mining companies. In January 2022, BYD, one of the
largest automakers in China, was awarded a contract to extract 80,000 metric tons of lithium
in Chile over 20 years, although the contract has been suspended by a Chilean court.20 In 2018,
China’s Tianqi Lithium purchased a 24% stake in SQM, one of only two major lithium producers
in Chile.21 Huayou Cobalt, a Chinese company with smelters and refining facilities both inside
and outside China, has vertically integrated by expanding into other stages of mineral supply
chains, as evidenced by its recent purchase of a lithium mine in Zimbabwe.22 Similarly, Ganfeng
Lithium, one of the major lithium producers and refiners, has acquired stakes in mining projects
in Argentina, Ireland, Chile, and Australia. CATL, the world’s largest EV battery manufacturer,
has acquired Canada-based Millennial Lithium, as well as stakes in an Australian lithium mining
company and in copper-cobalt mines in the DRC. At the start of 2022, Suzhou CATH Energy
Technologies entered into an agreement under which it will invest US$240 million in the
Manono lithium and tin project in the DRC in a joint venture with AVZ Minerals, earning a 24%
equity interest.23 Chinese companies have remained the largest source of foreign investment
in the nickel sector in Indonesia—the world’s largest producer of nickel—and Chinese-backed
companies own or have a financial stake in 15 of 19 cobalt-producing mines in the DRC.* 24
* Chinese mining giants like Huayou Cobalt and China Molybdenum, which dominate cobalt mining in the DRC, have also in-
creased investment in the nickel supply chain in Indonesia. See: Pattisson, P., & Firdaus, F. (2021, November 25). “Battery arms
race”: How China has monopolised the electric vehicle industry. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/global-develop-
ment/2021/nov/25/battery-arms-race-how-china-has-monopolised-the-electric-vehicle-industry
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 7

BOX 1. Rare Earth Elements
Rare earth elements are the only strategic sector over which China has a substantial hold
over mining activity. REEs include 17 metallic elements, four of which—neodymium,
dysprosium, praseodymium, and terbium—are of particular relevance to clean energy
technologies. Demand for these four elements is expected to rise dramatically (e.g.,
neodymium is projected to triple under the IEA’s Sustainable Development Scenario). They
play a particularly important role in motor technologies for EVs and wind power technologies
and can more easily be substituted in the case of supply concerns or disruptions, according
to Wood Mackenzie.25 The U.S. Department of Energy projects that “demand for rare earth
elements for wind power alone could exceed the supply for all uses by 1.6 to 3.5 times
over.”26 (REEs should not be mistaken for other strategic minerals, over which China has a
significantly less dominant role across the entire supply chain.)
China’s REE production increased at the beginning of this century and peaked at 95% of
the global share by 2010. It has decreased in recent years, down to nearly 60% in 2019.27
Other relevant producers include the U.S. and Myanmar, with just over 10% of global REE
production each. Currently, MP Materials is the only significant REE producer in the U.S.28
The company is minority owned by Shenghe Resources, a partly Chinese-state-owned
company that is also the sole purchaser of its output.29 Due to the level of concentration of
REE production and the lack of recycling pathways, efforts are ongoing to reduce REE use
in EV motors to reduce exposure to REE export control risks.* New discoveries—including a
potentially relevant discovery in Turkey in June 2022—may further reduce dependence on
China for REEs in the long term if these deposits can be successfully developed. However,
REE processing capacity remains concentrated in China.30
* According to the IEA, pathways to reducing REE use in EV motors include: “(i) improving material efficiency in magnet production
to obtain NdFeB magnets with less REE content but with similar performance; (ii) reducing the amount of NdFeB magnets in
permanent-magnet synchronous motors; (iii) substituting permanent-magnet motors with REE-free motors.” See: International
Energy Agency. (2021). The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions. https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-criti-
cal-minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 8

3 Efforts to Reduce
Dependence on China for
Critical Minerals
Concern is growing about China’s dominance in
critical minerals supply chains, but efforts to reduce
dependence on China face a range of challenges.
Governments in the West, notably in the U.S. and Europe, are working to build out their own
critical minerals supply chains to reduce dependence on China. This will be challenging and
costly, however. They will need to significantly increase mineral production domestically or in
allied countries, which will involve addressing conflicts over social and environmental impacts
that have halted mining projects. The U.S., in particular, will likely have to update and amend its
mining regulatory regime. Governments will also have to onshore or “friend-shore” smelting
and refining capacity. The midstream part of the equation is likely to be the most challenging,
complicated by high investment costs and market conditions. Finally, Western countries will need
to build out cell component and battery manufacturing capacities.
Western governments have laid out plans to reduce vulnerabilities and increase mineral supply
chain resilience.31 Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine has added to the salience and
urgency of these plans, underscoring that dependence on strategic rivals for critical resources is a
vulnerability. Organizations including the IEA are increasingly calling attention to the geopolitical
and energy security dimensions of critical minerals supply chains.32
The Biden administration is focused on developing U.S. critical minerals supply chains and issued
an executive order in February 2021 mandating a review of vulnerabilities in domestic supply
chains. President Joe Biden invoked the Defense Production Act in April 2022 to fund the mining,
processing, and recycling of lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite, and manganese. The proposed
Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 would incentivize investments across critical mineral supply
chains.33 It would require a certain percentage of batter components (by value) to be assembled
in the US, as well as a certain percentage of the battery minerals to come from a country with
which the US has a free trade agreement or to be recycled in North America. These requirements
gradually ramp up through 2027. This is likely to benefit Canada (the major North American
miner) and Australia (a key producer of lithium). The act increases funds available for the
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 9

midstream, including US$500 million to build critical minerals processing infrastructure as part
the Defense Production Act, as well as additional tax credits for companies involved in critical
minerals processing. It also provides grants and loans for new clean vehicle manufacturing
facilities.34 Similarly, the European Battery Alliance aims to expand mineral refining and battery
production capacities in the EU to reduce dependence on China.35
Multilateral cooperation around critical minerals is also growing. In June 2022, the U.S.
announced the Minerals Security Partnership (MSP), which has been dubbed “a metallic NATO.”
MSP partners include Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, the Republic of
Korea, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the U.S., and the European Commission.36 It reflects a new
strategic emphasis on friend-shoring, which U.S. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen has described
as a strategy in which a group of countries with shared values (e.g., liberal democracies) deploy
policies that encourage companies to anchor supply chains within that group. The aim is to
prevent strategic rivals from unfairly leveraging a market advantage in a key industry, such as
critical minerals, to disrupt the economy of the U.S. or its allies. Japan and Korea are notable
members because they have sizable capacities in the production of cell components outside of
China and will likely be especially crucial to these friend-shoring efforts.
EV and car manufacturing companies, along with other downstream actors in the U.S. and the EU,
also have an important role to play in diversifying supply chains. They are increasingly pursuing
strategies to secure long-term supplies of processed minerals and reduce reliance on China.
These include expanding their operations to other parts of the supply chain (in what is known
as vertical integration). General Motors’ deal with POSCO Chemical to establish a factory in
Canada to process cathode active material is one example of this.37 EV manufacturers have also
established direct sourcing deals and association strategies. For example, Liontown Resources, an
Australian lithium miner, recently agreed to direct sourcing deals with Tesla, Ford, and LG Energy.38
Reducing dependence on China for critical minerals is likely to be challenging. The following
sections explore three key issues that will need to be addressed: political challenges and
stakeholder opposition to onshore mining development (i.e., community opposition, institutional
challenges, and government inertia), limited investment in mineral refining and smelting, and
limited cell component and battery manufacturing capacities.
3.1 Political Challenges and Stakeholder Opposition to Onshore
Mining Development
It is difficult to build out domestic critical minerals supply chains without domestic sources of
raw minerals. In June 2022, the U.S. Department of the Interior announced that it would invest an
estimated US$74 million across 30 states to better map areas with potential for critical minerals.39
However, bringing new supplies online in the short term will be challenging. There is no single
federal agency with authority over domestic mining, and the regulatory regime for mining in
the U.S. is outdated. Moreover, existing projects in the pipeline face a range of political and
stakeholder challenges.40
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 10

For example, the U.S. holds about 4% of global lithium reserves but has just one producing lithium
mine and is struggling to bring additional projects online. Lithium Americas’ Thacker Pass project
in Humboldt County, Nevada, which would develop the largest known lithium resource in the
U.S., reportedly faces staunch opposition from state environmental groups, Native American
communities, and local ranchers.41 Lithium Americas received a permit from the U.S. Bureau of
Land Management to develop the mine in January 2022 but has faced multiple legal challenges
due to alleged negative social and environmental impacts and inadequate consultation with
project-affected Native American communities.42 Similarly, ioneer’s Rhyolite Ridge Lithium-Boron
Project has faced intense opposition from environmentalists who allege that the project threatens
Tiehm’s buckwheat, a rare flowering plant listed by the Biden administration as endangered.43
Domestic copper and nickel development in the U.S. has faced similar challenges. In January
2022, the U.S. Department of the Interior canceled two mineral leases for Antofagasta’s Twin
Metals copper and nickel project in northern Minnesota.44 President Barack Obama had moved
to block the project, which is on the edge of the Boundary Waters (a large area of protected
lakes and forests), but the mineral leases were reinstated by the Trump administration in 2019.
The Interior Department determined that the leases were improperly reinstated and cited
significant legal deficiencies in the renewal, including a violation of departmental regulations and
an inadequate environmental analysis. In May 2022, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
banned the disposal of mining waste in Alaska’s Bristol Bay watershed, which is likely the final
nail in the coffin for Northern Dynasty’s controversial proposed Pebble copper project.45 The
Resolution Copper project in Arizona, a joint venture owned by Rio Tinto and BHP, has faced
legal challenges from Apache Stronghold, a nonprofit group comprising members of the San
Carlos Apache tribe.46 The project sits on land that is of religious significance to the Apache, and
the group argues that development of the mine would undermine their religious rights. The U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled against Apache Stronghold in June 2022.47 The group
has signaled its intention to appeal to the Supreme Court.
Simultaneously, Congress is pursuing reforms to the General Mining Act of 1872, although
these efforts have consistently encountered political roadblocks. In April 2022, House
Natural Resources Committee Chair Raúl M. Grijalva (D-AZ) and Senator Martin Heinrich (D-
NM) introduced the Clean Energy Minerals Reform Act, which would update the 1872 act to
strengthen environmental protections, require the government to consult with Native American
groups before permitting mines near tribal communities, and institute a royalty on mining on
public lands. The bill has faced opposition from environmental groups, which want even stronger
protections, as well as from moderate Democratic and conservative lawmakers who are opposed
to the introduction of a royalty. It may be difficult to build the political consensus needed for
meaningful mining reform, particularly given internal divisions among Democrats.
The Biden administration is currently taking some steps to address these challenges related
to political and stakeholder factors, but its efforts are not commensurate with the scale of the
challenge. In February 2022, the Interior Department announced a new interagency working
group on reforming hardrock mining laws, regulations, and permitting policies. The timeline for
this reform and plans to successfully advance it through Congress, particularly in the context of
Biden’s ongoing failure to advance a legislative agenda, is unclear. Moreover, the administration
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 11

has been unwilling to advance controversial projects like Pebble and Twin Metals, which are likely
needed to significantly increase domestic supply in the short term.
Europe also faces opposition as it pushes to bring critical minerals projects online. Savannah
Resources’ Mina do Barroso—which would be Europe’s first significant producer of spodumene,
a hardrock form of lithium—has faced red tape and political delays in its Environmental Impact
Assessment approval process.48 The project reportedly faces a high degree of local stakeholder
opposition.49 In January 2022, the Serbian government canceled Rio Tinto’s Jadar lithium project
amid protests over perceived environmental impacts.50
3.2 Limited Investment in Mineral Refining and Smelting
Even if the U.S. and EU were to dig more minerals out of the ground, many of these minerals
would need to be shipped overseas for concentrating, refining, and smelting without significant
increases in U.S. and European mineral refining and smelting capacity. The only notable mineral
processing capacity outside of China is in Europe, but this is mostly limited to cobalt processing,
mainly at plants in Finland. (Europe currently accounts for 20% of global cobalt processing.)
The solution would be to build new refiners and smelters in the U.S., Europe, or other allied
nations, such as those in the MSP, as part of a combined onshoring and friend-shoring effort.
Some progress has been made in this direction. The UK has recently announced plans to build up
its lithium refining capacities. Green Lithium has plans to build a lithium refinery with production
capacity of 50,000 tons per year in the North of England, through an investment from Trafigura,
one of the world’s biggest metal traders. Additionally, Livista Energy, another start-up, has
secured funding to build a plant with an initial capacity of 30,000 tons per year, with the potential
of increasing up to 60,000 tons per year. However, bringing new mineral refining and smelting
capacity online is overall extremely difficult due to high investment costs and vulnerability to
volatile or poor market outlooks.
China’s domestic refining business has proven to be significantly more cost-competitive than
refineries overseas, leading to refinery closures outside of China.51 Construction of refineries
and smelters outside of China (many of which have been financed by Chinese investments) has
proven costly and challenging. For example, China’s Tianqi Lithium’s lithium hydroxide plant in
Kwinana, Australia, is only partly operational after US$700 million in investment and three years
of construction.52 The plant was approved in 2016, but development was paused due to market
conditions related to the low prices of lithium at the time, which were associated with high
price volatility for battery metals.53 Chinese companies like Tianqi have benefited from financial
support from China’s state-owned banks, such as CITIC Bank, which can channel government
support for industries deemed strategic in order to resolve debt problems stemming from large
investments at a time of low commodity prices.
Smelters, refiners, and other types of processing infrastructure are susceptible to the same
kinds of opposition as mining projects themselves, with stakeholders concerned about potential
social and environmental impacts. This can create complications in permitting and approvals
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 12

processes. The industrial processes required for battery metals refining and recycling tend to
generate a large carbon footprint and other toxic emissions (especially in the case of nickel). This
has led to opposition from communities hosting these industrial facilities. One example is the case
of a planned lithium-ion battery recycling facility in New York by SungEel MCC in New York, which
canceled its plans because of community concerns regarding the facility’s alleged toxic emissions.54
3.3 Limited Cell Component and Battery Manufacturing Capacities
The U.S has limited capacity to produce the cell components (cathodes, anodes, and collectors)
needed for batteries and the batteries themselves. Europe hosts some manufacturers of cell
components, crucially Germany’s BASF, Belgium’s Umicore, and Sweden’s Northvolt, but
capacity is limited. Moreover, another major obstacle is that the U.S., Europe, and other Western
countries lack investment in overall battery manufacturing capacities compared to China. Indeed,
China’s heavy investment in EVs and battery storage has sometimes been characterized as
overinvestment because it has generated significant excess capacity in some cases.55
China currently dominates global battery production, accounting for 77% (250 GWh) of lithium-
ion battery production in 2020. The U.S. accounted for 9% (42 GWh), and the EU accounted for
6% (28 GWh).56 One reason for China’s dominance in the cell component markets is its low costs,
which have been cited as a major reason behind offshoring of cell manufacturing to China.57
A June 2022 paper by the Coalition for a Prosperous America projected that U.S. battery
production will increase to around 320 GWh by 2025 but that this will barely cover rising
demand and will therefore not significantly increase the country’s share of global production.58
The outlook is somewhat more optimistic in Europe. This is in part due to strategies such as the
European Battery Alliance, which aims to decrease reliance on batteries and other technologies
from outside Europe and aspires to cover all of the industrial needs of car manufacturers in
Europe by 2025 through an industrial plan that involves developing gigafactories across the
continent. The EU is projected to account for 22% of global battery production by 2025.59
The Biden administration is taking steps to build out cell component and battery manufacturing
capacity, including providing investment for this purpose. Coupled with global supply chain distress
over the past two years, this has prompted the private sector (notably automakers) to make some
moves to onshore this production. For example, Redwood Materials has entered into an agreement
with Korean battery materials maker L&F to use a new L&F factory in the U.S. to produce battery
cathodes for 1 million EVs per year by 2025 and more than 5 million per year by 2030.60 In May
2022, the Hyundai Motor Group announced plans to invest US$5.5 billion to build an EV and
battery manufacturing plant in the state of Georgia.61 In July 2022, Panasonic announced plans for
a US$4 billion EV battery plant in Kansas.62 These efforts are relatively nascent, however, because
automakers have been reluctant to invest until relatively recently (with the exception of Tesla). In
the longer term, it is unclear whether this investment will be commensurate with the scale of the
challenge. Development efforts also face other challenges. For example, the industry has cited
attracting skilled workers as a key obstacle to ramping up production.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 13

The extent to which the U.S. and Europe can address these challenges will determine their ability
to develop competitive critical minerals supply chains. It is important to note, however, that future
demand for critical minerals is highly uncertain. An analysis of the determining factors is beyond
the scope of this paper, but technological developments (e.g., new batteries with significantly
reduced critical minerals requirements) and improvements in recycling (e.g., major process
improvements in the recycling of tailings from processing, scrap used in manufacturing, and scrap
from end-of-life products) may reduce the need for new upstream and midstream investments.
Such developments are unlikely to entirely eliminate the need for such new investments, however.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 14

4 Will China Tighten Due
Diligence on Critical
Minerals Supply Chains?
Due diligence requirements on Chinese midstream
actors—notably smelters and refiners—and
downstream actors will be crucial to the development
of responsible critical minerals supply chains globally.
Awareness of responsible sourcing and compliance with environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) standards has grown, and these factors are increasingly important and
commercially material to actors across critical minerals supply chains globally.
However, compliance with best practices in critical minerals supply chains requires end-to-end
coordination, from the mining of raw materials to cell and battery pack manufacturing. Smelting
and refining constitute a key stage in the supply chain for companies to track the conditions
under which the mineral they purchase is extracted, handled, transported, and traded from the
mine site through to local suppliers. As a result, smelters and refiners are more strategically
positioned to demand due diligence and compliance with responsible sourcing practices and
impose greater scrutiny than are cell manufacturers, pack manufacturers, or EV automakers.
This section explores two key factors that may influence whether China moves to tighten due
diligence requirements on critical minerals supply chains. The first is the evolving conversation
in China about responsible business conduct. The second is external developments and
expectations related to responsible sourcing among governments and private companies,
particularly in the U.S. and Europe.
4.1 Responsible Business Developments in China
In the last two decades, China has introduced legislation and developed various industry
guidelines for responsible business, such as the Company Law, which was first introduced in
2006 to endorse the idea that companies have a social responsibility. In addition, the three main
stock exchanges in China, in Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Hong Kong, have issued guidelines for
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 15

responsible business reporting. As part of this effort, China has also taken important steps to
tighten due diligence on mineral supply chains. These include:
• CCCMC’s Guidelines for Social Responsibility in Outbound Mining Investment. The China
Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals & Chemicals Importers & Exporters (CCCMC),
a unit within the Ministry of Commerce, issued its Guidelines for Social Responsibility in
Outbound Mining Investment in October 2014. These called for Chinese mining companies
undertaking outbound mining investment, cooperation, and trade to strictly “observe the UN
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights during the entire life-cycle of the mining
project” and to strengthen “the responsibility throughout the extractive industries value
chain.”63 The Chinese government has also explicitly said that it expects Chinese mining
companies to follow applicable local laws.64
• CCCMC’s Due Diligence Guidance. In 2015, the CCCMC published its Chinese Due Diligence
Guidelines for Responsible Mineral Supply Chains, which were based on the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development’s guidelines for responsible mineral supply
chains.65 The CCCMC guidelines consist of five steps that companies must take to identify,
address, prevent, and mitigate risks associated with their activities or sourcing decisions. They
apply to all Chinese companies operating across mineral supply chains.66 The guidelines lay
out two risk categories: 1) risks of conflict and human rights abuses associated with extracting,
trading, processing, and exporting resources from conflict-affected and high-risk areas and
2) risks associated with misconduct in environmental, social, and ethical issues (including but
not limited to the fields of labor regulations, consultation mechanisms, and consent from
Indigenous groups) throughout the supply chain.67 The influence of this guidance is unclear,
however, particularly given its nonmandatory nature. Moreover, the actual influence and
leverage that CCCMC has over its members is unclear. CCCMC does not have the power to
supervise or implement the due diligence measures as an industry association.
Despite having these standards, China’s enforcement of due diligence standards appears to
be limited, especially given that many of these guidelines are voluntary.68 A 2021 report by
Global Witness assessed due diligence by Chinese refiners and smelters for tin, tantalum,
tungsten, and gold.69 The report concluded that due diligence enforcement was scarce and
that more transparency and proactive demonstration of responsible business were needed
from Chinese refiners. It also found that China’s participation in an industry-led program for
responsible sourcing of minerals did not necessarily ensure that Chinese refiners would publish
comprehensive due diligence information. The report recommends that China enact and enforce
legislation that adapts and requires the application of these guidelines for refiners and smelters
in order to prevent negative social, environmental, and governance impacts linked to Chinese
companies in the mineral supply chain.
Moreover, Chinese mining companies, which feed minerals to downstream operations, are
perceived by some governments in resource-rich countries (perhaps unfairly) to be less
committed to international best practice than their Western counterparts. The most serious
recent allegations are about Chinese companies’ operations in the DRC, reportedly involving
corruption70 and violations of human rights, including forced evictions, child labor, and other
labor and human rights abuses through subcontracting models.71 In early 2022, a DRC court
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 16

ruling removed China Molybdenum from leadership at the Tenke Fungurume copper-cobalt
mine for six months. While the company has reportedly regained control of the mine,72 it
stands accused of corruption and social and environmental performance issues, including
underreporting of mineral reserves as a way to reduce annual payments, weak worker safety
standards, and bribes to hide poor labor conditions.
These issues are not unique to Chinese mining companies; many mining companies operating
in the DRC have been accused of corruption and poor social and environmental standards.
Moreover, the Chinese government has at times been critical of the performance of some
Chinese mining companies abroad. When the DRC ordered six Chinese and Sino-foreign
joint venture mining companies to suspend operations in 2021, the Chinese Foreign Ministry
expressed support for the local ruling and announced that the companies would be sanctioned
by the governments of Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and Fujian provinces.73 As of the publication of
this paper, no public information was available about whether these companies were in fact
sanctioned in this way or had any legal action taken against them.
4.2 Evolving Responsible Sourcing Expectations
in the U.S. and EU
The evolution of responsible sourcing in the landscape in the U.S. and EU—in terms of emerging
legal and regulatory standards, industry schemes, and downstream actors’ tolerance for
reputational risk—will also likely have knock-on effects in China. For example, if new regulation
or pressure from downstream companies in the US and Europe create market access issues
for Chinese companies, creating legal, regulatory, and logistical obstacles to exporting critical
minerals products to major markets, those companies may be incentivized to implement tighter
due diligence mechanisms.
Three key factors are at play here. First, due diligence requirements are rapidly evolving,
particularly in Europe. In February 2022, the European Commission adopted a Proposal for a
Directive on Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence. The directive requires large companies
headquartered in the EU to conduct due diligence across their value chain, as well as to embed
sustainability and human rights considerations into their business strategies, decision-making
processes, and oversight mechanisms.74 The forthcoming EU battery regulation will impose a due
diligence obligation on battery manufacturers specifically, requiring them to address risks around
the sourcing, processing, and trading of raw materials, chemicals, and secondary raw materials.75
Moreover, several jurisdictions have proposed or adopted mandatory due diligence legislation
requiring more stringent corporate responses to human rights risks and adverse impacts in
their supply chains. This includes Switzerland’s Conflict Minerals and Child Labor Due Diligence
Legislation, France’s Corporate Duty of Vigilance Law, Germany’s Supply Chain Act, and Norway’s
Transparency Act.
Second, several industry schemes are focused on responsible sourcing. They include the London
Metal Exchange’s responsible sourcing requirements,76 the Initiative for Responsible Mining
Assurance,77 the Responsible Minerals Initiative,78 and the London Bullion Market Association
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 17

Responsible Sourcing Programme.79 These initiatives, particularly the London Metal Exchange’s
responsible sourcing requirements, do have an extraterritorial reach in China, but it is unclear
what kinds of levers they would be willing to employ when it comes to sanctioning China-based
companies for noncompliance with the standards.
Third, the reputational risks for downstream actors relating to responsible sourcing are
increasing. Several automakers (including Mercedes-Benz and Volkswagen) and technology
companies recently came under fire after a report by Amnesty International revealed that their
products were linked to cobalt mines in the DRC accused of serious human rights violations.
In June 2022, The New York Times reported that the Xinjiang Nonferrous Metal Industry Group
may have used coercive labor practices in its mines, smelters, and factories in Xinjiang (a region
in the far west of China where leading human rights groups, including Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch, have accused China of crimes against humanity against Uyghur Muslims
and other ethnic groups, including through forced labor transfer programs).80 Metals produced by
the company have been exported to the U.S. and Europe, while some have gone to large Chinese
battery makers, who then supply major U.S. entities downstream. If downstream actors become
more sensitive to the reputational risks of being perceived as sourcing “tainted” minerals, they
may put pressure on their Chinese suppliers to tighten due diligence requirements.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 18

5 What Could the Future
Look Like?
The following scenarios illustrate how dynamics
around critical minerals supply chains could
evolve over the next 10 to 20 years.
These scenarios consider the extent to which the U.S. and Europe might be able build out
their own critical minerals supply chains to rival those of China and whether Beijing moves
to “green” and “clean” these supply chains and tighten due diligence requirements. They also
consider the extent to which the world might have supplies of cleaner and greener minerals to
fuel the energy transition. Figure 1 presents a high-level overview of the scenarios.
High vs. Low Supply Chain Due Diligence by China
The horizontal axis considers the level of due diligence enforcement in China’s critical minerals
supply chains. Particularly important will be the enforcement of due diligence standards for
smelters and refiners, given their strategic point in the supply chain.
A high-enforcement scenario assumes that China has clear statutory requirements for due diligence,
with mechanisms to monitor and sanction smelting and refining companies for noncompliance.
Specifically, this means that the Chinese government has enacted and enforces legislation mandating
mineral supply chain due diligence that aligns with the CCCMC guidelines, including requiring
companies to disclose a due diligence policy, undertake independent third-party audits, and publish
annual reports detailing implementation of due diligence measures and steps taken to mitigate risks
in the supply chain. This also means that other key stakeholders in China, such as the Shanghai Gold
Exchange and major stock exchanges such as Shanghai, Shenzhen, and Hong Kong (government
ministry of the state council and Securities and Futures Commission for Hong Kong), have instituted
mineral supply due diligence guidelines that are mandatory for all their members.*81
* It should be noted that the Shenzhen Stock Exchange and Shanghai Stock Exchange have issued guidelines for responsible busi-
ness reporting and ESG impact information disclosure (in the case of Shanghai and Hong Kong). The stock market regulator in
China also issued rules in 2017 requiring all listed companies to disclose ESG risks associated with their operations and in 2018
added a chapter on responsible business to its Code of Corporate Governance for Listed Companies.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 19

Conversely, a low-enforcement scenario assumes a continuation of the status quo, with most
smelters and refiners falling short of standards for mineral supply chain due diligence.
High vs. Low Control of Supply Chains by China
The vertical axis considers the global share of upstream, midstream, and downstream critical
minerals activities dominated by China. A low-concentration scenario assumes a substantial
scale-up of capacity across the supply chain by other jurisdictions, including the U.S. and Europe.
A high-concentration scenario assumes that China maintains a high level of control over critical
minerals supply chains.
FIGURE 1. Potential Scenarios for Critical Minerals Supply Chains*
* Several factors outside the scope of this scenario analysis will materially affect how things evolve, of course, including overall
levels of demand for critical minerals and their prices, and technological breakthroughs that reduce mineral requirements for key
energy transition applications.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 20
lortnoC
fo
leveL
s’anihC
High
1Geopolitical and sustainability High 2 Beijing’s clean and green High
Control Control
risks imperil the energy transition monopoly
Low High
• Global critical minerals supply Enforcement • Global critical minerals Enforcement
chains are dominated end to end supply chains are dominated
by China, and the world is highly end to end by China, but the
dependent on China for the inputs needed country has instituted rigorous and legally
for decarbonization. binding due diligence requirements.
Implications for the energy transition Implications for the energy transition
• Premiums for a small supply of “cleaner” and • Potentially less price volatility, due to a
“greener” critical minerals and derivative robust supply of “cleaner” and “greener”
products, leading to price volatility critical minerals and derivative products
• Likely supply chain disruptions due to • Positive effects for natural resource
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues governance in resource-rich countries,
• Higher risk of social and political conflict helping to bring more minerals to market
around decarbonization efforts • Higher risk of supply chain disruptions due
to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
4 Bifurcation of critical minerals Low 3 A virtuous circle of competition Low
supply chains Control and sustainability Control
Low High
• Governments are able to Enforcement • The U.S. and Europe have Enforcement
monetize resources despite successfully built out critical
lower-than-anticipated demand and minerals supply chains to rival China.
less mining activity globally, due to perceived
• All players have instituted rigorous due
low levels of political and stakeholder risk.
diligence standards across the supply chain.
Implications for the energy transition
Implications for the energy transition
• Higher risk of price volatility for critical minerals
• The clear best-case scenario
and derivative products
• Lower risk of price volatility, due to an
• Potential for aggressive moves by Western
abundance of cleaner and greener minerals
governments to limit the flow of Chinese critical
and derivative products
minerals and derivative products
• Lower risk of supply chain disruptions due to
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
China’s Enforcement of Supply Chain Due Diligence
Low High

SCENARIO 1: 1Geopolitical and sustainability High 2 Beijing’s clean and green High
Control Control
risks imperil the energy transition monopoly
Geopolitical and Sustainability Low High
• Global critical minerals supply Enforcement • Global critical minerals Enforcement
chains are dominated end to end supply chains are dominated
Risks Imperil the Transition
by China, and the world is highly end to end by China, but the
dependent on China for the inputs needed country has instituted rigorous and legally
for decarbonization. binding due diligence requirements.
In this scenario, global critical minerals supply
Implications for the energy transition Implications for the energy transition
chains are dominated end to end by China.
• Premiums for a small supply of “cleaner” and • Potentially less price volatility, due to a
Mineral smelting and refining and battery
“greener” critical minerals and derivative robust supply of “cleaner” and “greener”
cell manufacturing are highly concentrated products, leading to price volatility critical minerals and derivative products
in China, while Chinese mining companies • Likely supply chain disruptions due to • Positive effects for natural resource
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues governance in resource-rich countries,
have expanded upstream control over critical
• Higher risk of social and political conflict helping to bring more minerals to market
minerals to feed downstream operations. around decarbonization efforts • Higher risk of supply chain disruptions due
The Chinese government has not made any to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
moves to implement legally binding due
diligence requirements on actors across the supply chain.
This scenario assumes that efforts in the U.S. and Europe to build out domestic critical
minerals supply chains have largely faltered, stymi 4 ed Bbifyu rscoactioianl oafn cdri tpicoall imticinaelr aolsp positionLo wto 3 A virtuous circle of competition Low
supply chains Control and sustainability Control
mining developments and insufficient midstream and downstream investment. CompLoawnies High
• Governments are able to Enforcement • The U.S. and Europe have Enforcement
and governments globally remain highly dependent onm Conheitnizee srees ocuorcmesp daenspiietes for the successfully built out critical
lower-than-anticipated demand and minerals supply chains to rival China.
inputs needed to achieve climate commitments involving decarbonization, especially
less mining activity globally, due to perceived
• All players have instituted rigorous due
rechargeable batteries. low levels of political and stakeholder risk.
diligence standards across the supply chain.
Implications for the energy transition
Implications for the energy transition
What would this mean for the energy transitio• nH?ig her risk of price volatility for critical minerals
• The clear best-case scenario
and derivative products
• Lower risk of price volatility, due to an
This scenario would be clearly negative for the energ•y Ptroatennstiiatli ofonr a. gTghreess igvelo mboavle ss ubyp Wpelyst eornf “green”
abundance of cleaner and greener minerals
governments to limit the flow of Chinese critical
and “clean” critical minerals for the energy transition would be insufficient, forcing difficult and derivative products
minerals and derivative products
decisions and tradeoffs. Key challenges in this scenario would include: • Lower risk of supply chain disruptions due to
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
• Premium prices for a small supply of clean critical minerals. This scenario would make
responsible sourcing challenging for companies across the supply chain, particularly
downstream actors. Automakers and other companies could struggle to source enough
“clean” and “green” critical minerals to bring enough product to market to meet demand,
particularly if their sourcing were under greater scrutiny from regulators, civil society
organizations, or consumers and it were challenging to source from China with a high
degree of confidence that minerals and/or mineral products were not linked to abuses.
This would likely be an acute risk for companies operating in jurisdictions with binding
due diligence laws; they could face significant fines or other adverse regulatory action for
abuses in their supply chains. Companies could therefore be willing to pay premiums for
critical minerals sourced transparently in accordance with strict due diligence standards,
leading to competition for a small share of the world’s clean critical minerals supplies. This
could theoretically drive up the cost of the energy transition significantly.
• Likely supply chain disruptions due to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues. This
scenario presents a risk that exports of critical minerals products could be interrupted in
the context of rising geopolitical tensions. The ongoing trade war between China and the
U.S. underscores the potential for trade controls. Moving forward, geopolitical disputes—
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 21

such as disputes stemming from China’s historic tensions with Taiwan and Hong Kong—
could trigger disruptions in the form of sanctions, disrupted maritime transport, or, in an
extreme scenario, military conflict. If China were to shut off the flow of mineral products
to the U.S. and Europe, this would likely slow the pace of the energy transition and make
key inputs, such as EV batteries, more costly.
There is reason to be concerned. China has, for example, implemented export controls
on REEs, in violation of international trade rules. In recent years, China has signaled new
efforts to attain full control over these exports due to their use in the manufacture of
military aircraft such as F-35 fighter jets. In October 2020, China passed a bill to allow
export controls on items considered to be critical to the state’s interest and security,
which it could apply to resources crucial to the energy transition. In 2021, China’s Ministry
of Industry and Information Technology proposed draft controls on exports of REEs. In
a worst-case version of this scenario, if China were to deem any or all critical minerals
relevant to national security, this could spark a rapid implementation of export bans of raw
and refined commodities in the event of trade disputes or geopolitical conflicts.
Even in the absence of an escalation in geopolitical tensions, more benign logistical
disruptions could affect the flow of mineral products from China to other markets. Port
closures and container ship congestion at Chinese ports have unleashed waves of global
supply chain shocks across commodities during the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to
severe delays in export shipping and rising costs of containers.
• Higher risk of social and political conflict around decarbonization efforts. In the
absence of a sufficient supply of “clean” and “green” critical minerals to power the energy
transition, the risk of social and political conflict around decarbonization efforts is much
higher. The push for “degrowth”—the idea that the only way to address the climate crisis is
to dramatically reduce levels of economic activity and significantly reduce the use of raw
materials—is increasingly working its way into conversations about the energy transition.
For example, the EU’s European Green Deal has faced intense criticism from civil society
organizations along those lines. In June 2021, a global coalition of 180 community
platforms, human rights and environmental organizations, and academics called on
Brussels to abandon plans to expand what it termed “dirty mining” as part of its Green
Deal and Green Recovery plans; Friends of the Earth Europe described the policy plans as
a “desperate plunder for raw materials seemingly at any cost.” In the context of growing
concern about the perceived negative environmental, social, and corruption impacts of
mining large quantities of minerals, this idea will likely gain traction.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 22

1SGeCopEolNiticAal RanIdO su s2ta:in ability High 2 Beijing’s clean and green High
Control Control
risks imperil the energy transition monopoly
Low High
B• eGliojbianl cgrit’sica lC mlineeraalns s uappnlyd G E r nf e orc e em n en t • Global critical minerals Enforcement
chains are dominated end to end supply chains are dominated
Mboy nChoinpa, oanldy th e world is highly end to end by China, but the
dependent on China for the inputs needed country has instituted rigorous and legally
for decarbonization. binding due diligence requirements.
In this scenario, as in scenario 1, global critical
Implications for the energy transition Implications for the energy transition
minerals supply chains are dominated end
• Premiums for a small supply of “cleaner” and • Potentially less price volatility, due to a
“tgore eennedr” bcyrit iCcahl imnian.e Irta las sasnud mdeerisva tthivea t the U.S. and robust supply of “cleaner” and “greener”
pEruodroucptes, lheaadvieng n too tp rsicuec vcoelaetidliteyd in building out critical minerals and derivative products
• Ldikoemly seusptpicly ccrhiatiinc adils mrupintioenrsa dlsu es utop ply chains and • Positive effects for natural resource
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues governance in resource-rich countries,
• H th ig a h t e r t h ri e sk w of o s r o l c d ia r l e an m d a p i o n li s ti c h a i l g c h o l n y fl i d ct e pendent on helping to bring more minerals to market
aCrohuinnda dfeocra rcbroitniiczaatli omn ienffeorrtasls products. However, • Higher risk of supply chain disruptions due
in this scenario Beijing has made concerted to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
efforts to ensure that actors across the supply
chain—including mining companies, smelters,
refiners, and manufacturers—are subject to rigorous and legally binding due diligence
4 Bifruercqautiiorne mof ecnrittisc atlh maitn aerrael sa ligned wLowith CCCMC standa3rdsA. vTihrteuo guos vciercrnlem ofe cnotm aplestoit ihono lds privLaowte
supapnlyd c shtaaintes -owned Chinese mi C n o i n n tr g ol companies operatinangd a sbursotaainda btoili thy igh operating stan Co d n a tr r o d l s
Low High
• G in o v t e h rn is m s e c nt e s n ar a e r a io bl . e A to s things stEannfodrc,e mthenits scenario is the le • a s T t h l e ik U e .S ly . a o nd f E t u h r e op f e o h u a r v , e because iEfn fCorcheimneant
monetize resources despite successfully built out critical
lroewmer-atihnasn -tahnetic dipoatmed idneamnatn dp alanyd er across critical mineral supmpilnye rcahls asuinpsp,ly i tc hwaiinlsl thoa rviveal lCehsinsa i. ncentive
less mining activity globally, due to perceived
to tighten due diligence. • All players have instituted rigorous due
low levels of political and stakeholder risk.
diligence standards across the supply chain.
Implications for the energy transition
Implications for the energy transition
What would this mean for the energy transition?
• Higher risk of price volatility for critical minerals
• The clear best-case scenario
and derivative products
This scenario would have mixed implications for the e• nLeorwgeyr rtirsak nofs pitriiocen v.o Tlahtileityy, dinuec tlou dane :
• Potential for aggressive moves by Western
abundance of cleaner and greener minerals
governments to limit the flow of Chinese critical
• Potentially less price volatility. Theoretically, there wanod udeldriv bateiv ea p rroodbuuctsst supply of “clean”
minerals and derivative products
• Lower risk of supply chain disruptions due to
and “green” critical minerals, or minerals mined and processed in accordance with
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
robust ESG standards, coupled with high transparency and traceability for transactions,
responsible sourcing, and destinations of raw and refined materials. This would be positive
for the entire supply chain, likely with at least some positive knock-on effects for natural
resource governance in resource-rich countries; it would improve environmental and
social performance and reduce risks of corruption, and, in turn, help bring more minerals
to market. These dynamics could reduce the risk of price volatility.
• Higher risk of supply chain disruptions due to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues.
As in scenario 1, this scenario includes a risk that exports of critical minerals products
could be interrupted in the context of rising geopolitical tensions or logistical challenges.
This would potentially slow the pace of the energy transition and create price shocks.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 23

1Geopolitical and sustainability High 2 Beijing’s clean and green High
Control Control
risks imperil the energy transition monopoly
Low High
• Global critical minerals supply Enforcement • Global critical minerals Enforcement
chains are dominated end to end supply chains are dominated
by China, and the world is highly end to end by China, but the
dependent on China for the inputs needed country has instituted rigorous and legally
for decarbonization. binding due diligence requirements.
Implications for the energy transition Implications for the energy transition
• Premiums for a small supply of “cleaner” and • Potentially less price volatility, due to a
“greener” critical minerals and derivative robust supply of “cleaner” and “greener”
products, leading to price volatility critical minerals and derivative products
• Likely supply chain disruptions due to • Positive effects for natural resource
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues governance in resource-rich countries,
• Higher risk of social and political conflict helping to bring more minerals to market
around decarbonization efforts • Higher risk of supply chain disruptions due
to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
4 B S if C urc E at N ion A o R f cr I i O tica 3 l m : i n erals Low 3 A virtuous circle of competition Low
supply chains Control and sustainability Control
A Virtuous Circle of CoLomw petition High
• Governments are able to Enforcement • The U.S. and Europe have Enforcement
monetize resources despite successfully built out critical
and Sustainability
lower-than-anticipated demand and minerals supply chains to rival China.
less mining activity globally, due to perceived
• All players have instituted rigorous due
low levels of political and stakeholder risk.
In this scenario, U.S. and European efforts to diligence standards across the supply chain.
Implications for the energy transition
build out domestic critical minerals supply Implications for the energy transition
• Higher risk of price volatility for critical minerals
acndh daeinrivsa thivaev pero bduecetsn largely successful. China • The clear best-case scenario
• Lower risk of price volatility, due to an
• Proetemntaiailn fosr aag kgereys spivlea myeovre, sb buyt W Eeustreornp e and the
abundance of cleaner and greener minerals
governments to limit the flow of Chinese critical
U.S. are both strong competitors, having and derivative products
minerals and derivative products
addressed the challenges set out in section • Lower risk of supply chain disruptions due to
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
3 and having made significant investments
across critical minerals supply chains from
mining to manufacturing.
The U.S. and Europe have achieved four key things in this scenario. First, they have
significantly increased domestic mining. The U.S. has achieved broad, bipartisan political
consensus that dramatically and urgently increasing domestic critical minerals output is
a major national security priority. The Biden administration has permitted controversial
projects—including the Pebble and Twin Metals projects—because it has deemed the
potential costs of not bolstering critical minerals supplies to be too high. Bipartisan
consensus has led to a coordinated effort between Congress and the executive branch to
simplify and streamline the permitting process. Congress has meaningfully updated the
General Mining Act of 1872, strengthening social and environmental protections and levying
a royalty, which is lessening stakeholder conflict around mining. This has allowed subsequent
administrations to more easily bring additional domestic mines online. Europe and MSP
partners have also brought many new mines into production.
Second, the U.S., Europe, and other MSP partners have made significant and highly
coordinated investments in refining and smelting capacity domestically and within countries
in the MSP. Tens of billions of dollars of capital have been deployed to build new smelters
and refiners and thereby reduce dependence on China. The U.S. has been particularly crucial
to this effort, deploying capital through a variety of mechanisms domestically and abroad
(such as the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment or the U.S. International
Development Finance Corporation).
Third, the U.S. and Europe have successfully developed thriving cell component and battery
manufacturing sectors. These sectors have seen considerable investment, with EV makers
onshoring this activity. This has been achieved through a combination of tax credits and
other economic incentives to the private sector, clear regulation to streamline permitting
and construction, and a national workforce development strategy. Direct cooperation and
collaborations with MSP partners, including Korean and Japanese companies in the case of
cathode and anode production, has also contributed to the success of this.
Fourth, the U.S. and Europe have continued to invest in innovation to develop a clear
advantage in mineral and battery recycling. This has provided an additional stream of critical
minerals, further bolstering supply chains in the U.S. and Europe.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 24

Against this backdrop, the world has continued to evolve toward mandatory due diligence
and responsible sourcing requirements, with global coordination. Individual jurisdictions
have aligned their regulatory regimes with these requirements to a high degree. The U.S.
and Europe have developed supply chains in line with extremely robust ESG standards, with
statutory requirements mandating supply chain due diligence that is aligned with the OECD
Guidance. This, in turn, has motivated China to also implement due diligence to remain a
competitive player.
What would this mean for the energy transition?
This is clearly the best-case scenario for the energy transition. Specifically, it would mean:
• Lower risk of price volatility due to an abundant supply of cleaner and greener critical
minerals. With several different major players in critical minerals supply chains, global
coordination around regulatory regimes for responsible sourcing is more likely, as is
alignment on statutory requirements between major jurisdictions, including the U.S., the
EU, China, and potentially others. This would be positive for the sustainability aspects of
the energy transition, generating a diverse supply of cleaner and greener minerals that
could be sourced by downstream actors globally. With multiple major players mining and
refining minerals in accordance with strict ESG standards, dirtier minerals could trade at
steep discounts. This would create a clear commercial motive for all players to adhere
to high standards. Moreover, responsible sourcing would lead to improved social license
to operate, which would then lead to improved mining conditions and increased mineral
supplies to international markets.
• Lower risk of supply chain disruptions due to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues.
With less concentration of critical minerals supply chains, Beijing would not be able to
easily turn off the flow of critical minerals. In the event of escalating geopolitical tensions
or logistical challenges, the U.S. and Europe would be much more resilient and would be
able to easily draw on their own supplies of critical minerals and critical minerals products.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 25

1Geopolitical and sustainability High 2 Beijing’s clean and green High
Control Control
risks imperil the energy transition monopoly
Low High
• Global critical minerals supply Enforcement • Global critical minerals Enforcement
chains are dominated end to end supply chains are dominated
by China, and the world is highly end to end by China, but the
dependent on China for the inputs needed country has instituted rigorous and legally
for decarbonization. binding due diligence requirements.
Implications for the energy transition Implications for the energy transition
• Premiums for a small supply of “cleaner” and • Potentially less price volatility, due to a
“greener” critical minerals and derivative robust supply of “cleaner” and “greener”
products, leading to price volatility critical minerals and derivative products
• Likely supply chain disruptions due to • Positive effects for natural resource
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues governance in resource-rich countries,
• Higher risk of social and political conflict helping to bring more minerals to market
around decarbonization efforts • Higher risk of supply chain disruptions due
to geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
SCENARIO 4: 4 Bifurcation of critical minerals Low 3 A virtuous circle of competition Low
supply chains Control and sustainability Control
Bifurcation of Critical Minerals Low High
• Governments are able to Enforcement • The U.S. and Europe have Enforcement
Supply Chains monetize resources despite successfully built out critical
lower-than-anticipated demand and minerals supply chains to rival China.
less mining activity globally, due to perceived
• All players have instituted rigorous due
low levels of political and stakeholder risk.
In this scenario, as in scenario 3, U.S. and diligence standards across the supply chain.
Implications for the energy transition
European efforts to build out domestic critical Implications for the energy transition
• Higher risk of price volatility for critical minerals
mineral supply chains have been largely • The clear best-case scenario
and derivative products
successful. In practical terms, this means • Potential for aggressive moves by Western • Lower risk of price volatility, due to an
abundance of cleaner and greener minerals
significantly increased domestic mining, a governments to limit the flow of Chinese critical and derivative products
minerals and derivative products
highly coordinated effort to make substantial • Lower risk of supply chain disruptions due to
geopolitical tensions or logistical issues
investments in refining and smelting capacity
domestically and within countries in the
MSP, major expansion of domestic cell component and battery manufacturing sectors, and
continuous investment in R&D to remain competitive.
However, in this scenario, the U.S. and EU have tight due diligence requirements on critical
minerals, but China does not. The result is two different streams of critical minerals globally:
one sourced and then refined and processed in the U.S. and EU in accordance with strict
due diligence regulations, and one sourced and then refined and processed in China without
strict due diligence. This means critical minerals supplies that are bifurcated into “cleaner”
and “dirtier.”
What would this mean for the energy transition?
This scenario would be negative for the energy transition, although not as bad as scenario 1.
The key implications include:
• Higher risk of price volatility for critical minerals and critical minerals products. The
bifurcation of critical minerals supply chains would likely have price implications, with
one potentially trading at a premium and the other at a discount. Depending on the
percentage of the supply chain that the U.S. and EU ultimately control, this could force
companies to choose between more expensive “cleaner” minerals and cheaper “dirtier”
ones. This could drive up the cost of the energy transition, although the situation is
unlikely to be as dire as that set out in scenario 1.
• Aggressive moves by Western governments to limit the flow of Chinese critical minerals
and critical minerals products. Governments in the U.S., Europe, and other countries
could move to limit the flow of Chinese critical minerals, either due to significant
geopolitical tensions (analogous to attempts to limit the flow of Russian oil and gas
following its invasion of Ukraine) or due to growing concerns about social, environmental,
or human rights abuses in the supply chain. This would likely exacerbate price volatility.
The exact dynamics—and, specifically, how aggressively governments might move to
force companies to use “cleaner” and “greener” critical minerals—would likely depend
on the geopolitical climate and the extent of concerns about abuses in critical minerals
supply chains. The U.S. and Europe could potentially move to institute stricter mandatory
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 26

ESG requirements for critical minerals and critical minerals products specifically, along
the lines of the Dodd-Frank legislation in the U.S.*
In a more extreme version of this scenario, the U.S. and Europe could seek to take
aggressive regulatory action to ban imports of critical minerals products. This would
create a much more challenging legal and regulatory environment for companies
that are crucial to the energy transition, including automakers. There is already some
precedent for this. The Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, signed into law by
President Biden in December 2021, assumes that goods made in whole or in part in the
Xinjiang region of China are produced with forced labor and therefore prohibited from
importation into the U.S.82 The U.S. and Europe could also seek to target bad actors—
including Chinese companies and individuals and their proxies—through targeted
sanctions and prosecutions, potentially making it more difficult for Western companies
to do business with Chinese actors along the value chain. There is also precedent
for this. Israeli billionaire Dan Gertler was sanctioned by the Trump administration in
2017 under the U.S. government’s Global Magnitsky Sanctions program for his alleged
involvement in large-scale corruption in the DRC’s mining sector.83 In December 2022,
The U.S. Treasury sanctioned a DRC national, Alain Mukonda, and 12 entities linked to
him for allegedly providing support to Gertler, including opening bank accounts for him
and making payments into proxy bank accounts for him.84
Chinese government authorities could institute their own sanctions on restrictions on
companies or individuals in the Europe and US in response. These kinds of actions would
likely create turbulence across critical minerals markets.
* Section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires that companies with
tin, tantalum, tungsten, or gold in their products report to the Securities and Exchange Commission on their due
diligence processes for these minerals.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 27

6 Conclusion
The clear best-case scenario for the energy transition is scenario 3, in which critical minerals
supply chains are no longer concentrated in China and due diligence requirements on
critical minerals and their derivative products are globally harmonized. The second-best, albeit
suboptimal, scenario would be scenario 4, in which the U.S. and Europe have built out their own
critical minerals supply chains but, given a lack of movement on due diligence requirements in
China, global supplies are split into “cleaner” and “dirtier” minerals. Scenario 1, in which China
retains a clear dominance but does not strengthen due diligence is the clear worst-case scenario.
This would present a serious risk of disruption to the energy transition if rising geopolitical
tensions or more benign logistical issues limit the flow of critical minerals products out of China.
It would also increase the risk that the energy transition could cause or contribute to social
and environmental harms through the mining and processing of critical minerals. In our view,
scenario 2, in which China retains a clear dominance but makes moves to institute mandatory
due diligence on critical minerals, is highly unlikely.
To achieve either the best-case or second-best-case outcome, governments in the U.S. and
Europe will need to build substantially on their existing commitments to build out their critical
minerals supply chain. This would likely entail significant additional financial capital, ongoing
innovation, and improvements to regulatory and permitting regimes. This by itself would be
challenging, but especially given the current global context. In the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, governments globally are facing myriad economic
challenges, including high inflation, a commodity price shock and global energy crisis, and
the looming threat of recession. Governments are not in the best position to be writing large
checks, particularly for mining and smelting projects that may be tough sells to voters who are
concerned about social and environmental impacts. Competing pressures may take time and
attention away from the critical minerals agenda. Political polarization, especially in the U.S.,
could make it difficult to achieve political consensus around how to most effectively build out
these supply chains—especially where difficult tradeoffs may be required.
As discussed in section 3, there is some reason for optimism. The Biden administration’s planning
efforts around critical minerals supply chains are encouraging, and recent private-sector
investments in battery manufacturing are a promising sign. However, this will be a long-term
endeavor, and only time will tell if there is enough political will and financial backing to build on
this momentum.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 28

To achieve the best-case outcome, continued global engagement around due diligence and
responsible sourcing would also be needed. China is unlikely to institute mandatory due diligence
requirements, but this is not beyond the realm of possibility. A number of industry associations,
including the Responsible Minerals Initiative, have been active in China for some time. Continued
pressure and evolving due diligence requirements elsewhere globally, especially in Europe, could
move the needle, especially if failure to do so creates market access issues.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 29

About the Authors
Rodrigo Castillo is a research associate for the Leveraging Transparency to Reduce Corruption
initiative. His research focuses on critical minerals, climate trends, the geopolitics of the energy
transition, and how these impact value chains in renewable technologies, infrastructure,
extractive industries, and energy markets. He has been a consultant at the World Bank and has
also worked at think tanks in the U.S. and Latin America. He holds a bachelor’s degree from
Northwestern University.
Caitlin Purdy is the senior program officer for the Leveraging Transparency to Reduce Corruption
initiative. She focuses on complex political, social, and stakeholder issues in the mining and
energy sectors, and has significant experience in assessing and managing risks for boards and
C-suites at greenfield and brownfield investments and working with civil society to increase
transparency and accountability around social and environmental impacts. She was previously
a senior associate at Critical Resource. She holds master’s degrees from the London School of
Economics and Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
LTRC is extremely grateful for the thoughtful and meticulous peer review contributed by
Brad Brooks-Rubin, Dr. Zha Daojiong (Professor of International Political Economy, School of
International Studies, Peking University), Luca Maiotti (OECD Centre for Responsible Business
Conduct), and Louis Maréchal (OECD Centre for Responsible Business Conduct). This paper
solely reflects the views of the authors. Any errors are those of the authors alone.
This publication is made possible by support from the BHP Foundation. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions in this report are solely those of the authors and do
not represent positions or policies of the BHP Foundation, its officers, employees, or
other donors. Brookings is committed to quality, independence, and impact in all of its
work. Activities supported by its donors reflect this commitment, and the analysis and
recommendations are solely determined by the scholars.
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 30

9 Copper shares correspond to IEA estimates:
References International Energy Agency. (2021). The Role
of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions.
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-
minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions
1 International Energy Agency. (2021). The Role
of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions.
10 Shares for cathodes and anodes correspond to IEA
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-
estimates: International Energy Agency. (2022).
minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions
Global Supply Chains of EV Batteries. https://
www.iea.org/reports/global-supply-chains-of-ev-
2 Attwood, J., & Fuentes, V. (2022, February 1). In
batteries
Chile’s big mining shake-up, radical moves remain
a long shot. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.
11 Ladislaw, S., Zindler, E., Nakano, J., Tsafos, N.,
com/news/articles/2022-02-01/in-chile-s-big-
Carey, L., Goldie-Scot, L., Lezcano, P., & Chase,
mining-shake-up-radical-moves-remain-a-long-
J. (2021). Industrial Policy, Trade, and Clean
shot
Energy Supply Chains. Center for Strategic and
International Studies. https://www.csis.org/
3 Lipton, E., & Searcey, D. (2022, February 28).
analysis/industrial-policy-trade-and-clean-
Chinese company removed as operator of cobalt
energy-supply-chains
mine in Congo. The New York Times. https://www.
nytimes.com/2022/02/28/world/congo-cobalt-
12 Pettitt, J. (2022, January 15). How the U.S.
mining-china.html
fell behind in lithium, the “white gold” of
electric vehicles. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.
4 Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs.
com/2022/01/15/how-the-us-fell-way-behind-
(2017). OECD Due Diligence Guidance for
in-lithium-white-gold-for-evs.html
Responsible Business Conduct. Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development. http://
13 Goh, B., & Patton, D. (2022, March 21). Volkswagen
mneguidelines.oecd.org/OECD-Due-Diligence-
unveils Asian ventures to secure e-battery
Guidance-Responsible-Business-Conduct.pdf
materials supply. Reuters. https://www.reuters.
com/business/autos-transportation/volkswagen-
5 International Energy Agency. (2021). The Role
china-says-will-form-ventures-with-huayou-
of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions.
cobalt-tsingshan-group-2022-03-21/
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-
minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions
14 Ganfeng Lithium. (2020, June 28). Ganfeng
Lithium and BMW signed a “long-term supply
6 Valckx, N., Stuermer, M., Seneviratne, D., & Prasad,
agreement” to accelerate the progress of vehicle
A. (2021, December 8). Metals Demand from
electrification. http://www.ganfenglithium.com/
Energy Transition May Top Current Global Supply.
new_detail_en/id/15.html
International Monetary Fund. https://blogs.imf.
org/2021/12/08/metals-demand-from-energy-
15 International Energy Agency. (2021). The Role
transition-may-top-current-global-supply/
of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions.
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-
7 Erbach, G., & Merz, K. (2021, July). EU-US
minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions
Explainer: Resilient supply chains in the green
transition. European Parliament. https://
16 Green Car Congress. (2022, June 11). Benchmark
www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/
Mineral Intelligence: Lithium oversupply
ATAG/2021/696181/EPRS_ATA(2021)696181_
not likely. https://www.greencarcongress.
EN.pdf
com/2022/06/20220611-benchmark.html
8 Yeomans, J., & Harter, F. (2022, May 1). Who owns
17 Forsythe, M., & Bradsher, K. (2021, December
the Earth? The scramble turns critical. The Times.
22). Why a Chinese company dominates electric
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/who-owns-
car batteries. The New York Times. https://www.
the-earth-the-scramble-for-minerals-turns-
nytimes.com/2021/12/22/business/china-catl-
critical-jbglsgm02
electric-car-batteries.html
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 31

18 Zijin Mining Group Co., Ltd. (2022, June 29). 27 International Energy Agency. (2021). The Role
Announcement in Relation to the Acquisition of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions.
of the Xiangyuan Lithium Polymetallic Mine in https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-
Dao County, Hunan Province. https://www. minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions
zijinmining.com/upload/file/2022/06/29/
f6d3361f56c7412e91e57a98459b3904.pdf 28 Tucker, T. (2022). Everything is Climate Now:
New Directions for Industrial Policy from Biden’s
19 International Energy Agency. (2021). The Role Supply Chain Reports. Roosevelt Institute.
of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions. https://rooseveltinstitute.org/wp-content/
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical- uploads/2022/05/RI_EverythingClimateNow_
minerals-in-clean-energy-transitions IssueBrief_202205-2.pdf
20 Carino Jr., D. (2022, January 17). Chilean appeals 29 Hui, M. (2021, February 19). A Chinese rare earths
court orders suspension of lithium auction. S&P giant is building international alliances worldwide.
Global Market Intelligence. https://www.spglobal. Quartz. https://qz.com/1971108/chinese-rare-
com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest- earths-giant-shenghe-is-building-global-alliances/
news-headlines/chilean-appeals-court-orders-
suspension-of-lithium-auction-68444196 30 Baraniuk, C. (2022, July 13). Turkey probably hasn’t
found the rare earth metals it says it has. Wired.
21 Swamynathan, Y., & Nicholson, M. (2018, May https://www.wired.co.uk/article/turkey-rare-
17). China’s Tianqi Lithium to buy a quarter of earth-metals?utm_source=twitter
Chile’s SQM for $4.1 billion. Reuters. https://www.
reuters.com/article/us-tianqi-lithium-m-a-sqm- 31 The White House. (2022, February 22). FACT
idUSKCN1II1I8 SHEET: Securing a Made in America Supply Chain
for Critical Minerals. https://www.whitehouse.gov/
22 Dzirutwe, M., & Daly, T. (2021, December 22). briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/02/22/
China’s Huayou buys lithium mine in Zimbabwe fact-sheet-securing-a-made-in-america-supply-
for $422 mln. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/ chain-for-critical-minerals/
business/chinas-huayou-buys-lithium-mine-
zimbabwe-422-mln-2021-12-22/ 32 International Energy Agency. (2022, March 24).
2022 IEA Ministerial Communiqué. https://www.
23 Iannucci, E. (2022, February 16). AVZ waives iea.org/news/2022-iea-ministerial-communique
conditions of $240m Manono deal. Mining Weekly.
https://www.miningweekly.com/print-version/ 33 The Inflation Reduction Act, H.R. 5376, 117th
avz-waives-conditions-of-240m-manono- Cong. (2022). https://www.democrats.senate.
deal-2022-02-16 gov/imo/media/doc/inflation_reduction_act_
of_2022.pdf
24 Lipton, E., & Searcey, D. (2022, February 28).
Chinese company removed as operator of cobalt 34 Leber, R. (2022, July 28). What’s in the “game
mine in Congo. The New York Times. https://www. changer” climate bill nobody saw coming.
nytimes.com/2022/02/28/world/congo-cobalt- Vox. https://www.vox.com/policy-and-
mining-china.html politics/2022/7/28/23281757/whats-in-climate-
bill-inflation-reduction-act
25 Merriman, D. (2022, March 23). Rare earths:
vital elements of the energy transition. Wood 35 BloombergNEF. (2022). Energy Storage Trade
Mackenzie. https://www.woodmac.com/news/ and Manufacturing a Deep Dive. CSIS Energy
opinion/rare-earths-vital-elements-of-the- Security and Climate Change Program. https://
energy-transition/ csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/Energy%20Storage%20Case%20Study%20
26 Tucker, T. (2022). Everything is Climate Now: -%20BloombergNEF.pdf?KCOqvXlE3LM6AlBS.
New Directions for Industrial Policy from Biden’s lyXF9LnQ7GTk5oc
Supply Chain Reports. Roosevelt Institute.
https://rooseveltinstitute.org/wp-content/ 36 U.S. Department of State. (2022, June 14). Minerals
uploads/2022/05/RI_EverythingClimateNow_ Security Partnership. https://www.state.gov/
IssueBrief_202205-2.pdf minerals-security-partnership/
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 32

37 Foldy, B. (2022, January 03). GM, Volkswagen 47 Grzincic, B. (2022, June 27). Split appeals court
build up their battery supply chains amid advances transfer of sacred Apache site to
electric-vehicle push. The Wall Street Journal. copper miners. Reuters. https://www.reuters.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/gm-volkswagen- com/legal/government/split-appeals-court-
build-up-their-battery-supply-chains-amid- advances-transfer-sacred-apache-site-copper-
electric-vehicle-push-11641205981?reflink=deskt miners-2022-06-27/
opwebshare_twitter
48 Jamasmie, C. (2022, July 06). Savannah Resources
38 Nair, R., Ghosh, S. (2022, June 29). Australia’s shares hammered as Portugal lithium project
Liontown inks lithium deal with Ford after Tesla, subject to further EIA step. Mining.com. https://
LG agreements. Reuters. https://www.reuters. www.mining.com/savannah-resources-shares-
com/business/autos-transportation/australias- hammered-as-portugal-lithium-project-subject-
liontown-signs-5-year-lithium-supply-deal-with- to-further-eia-step/
ford-motor-2022-06-28/
49 Waldersee, V., Waldersee, D., Goncalves, S., &
39 Jamasmie, C. (2022, June 23). US allots $74 million Melander, I. (2020, February 14). Portuguese
to critical minerals mapping. Mining.com. https:// communities lock horns with lithium miners to
www.mining.com/us-allots-74-million-to-critical- save their land. Mining.com. https://www.mining.
minerals-mapping/ com/web/portuguese-communities-lock-horns-
with-lithium-miners-to-save-their-land/
40 Hume, N. (2022, February 25). Is there a new
supercycle in metals and minerals? Financial 50 Sekularac, I. (2022, January 20). Serbia revokes
Times. https://www.ft.com/content/975b92c0- Rio Tinto lithium project licences amid protests.
8f70-48c2-8e50-f615db68228d Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/business/retail-
consumer/serbian-government-revokes-rio-
41 Jaskula, B. (2021, January). Lithium. U.S. tintos-licences-lithium-project-2022-01-20/
Geological Survey. https://pubs.usgs.gov/
periodicals/mcs2021/mcs2021-lithium.pdf 51 Islam, R. (Host). (2022, April 13). Cobalt Market
Dynamics and the Energy Transition [Audio
42 Xinhua. (2022, July 08). US largest lithium podcast episode]. In Tell Me How. World
mining project faces strong resistance. Bank. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/
Global Times. https://www.globaltimes.cn/ podcast/2022/04/13/cobalt-market-dynamics-
page/202207/1270091.shtml and-the-energy-transition
43 Scheyder, E. (2021, June 03). U.S. to list Nevada 52 Bednarski, L. (2021). Lithium: The Global Race
flower as endangered, dealing blow to lithium for Battery Dominance and the New Energy
mine. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/business/ Revolution. London: Hurst Publishers.
environment/us-officials-list-nevada-flower-
endangered-dealing-blow-ioneer-2021-06-03/ 53 Holman, J. (2021, August 23). IGO, Tianqi
successfully produce first lithium hydroxide
44 Tabuchi, H. (2022, January 26). Biden at Australia’s Kwinana refinery. S&P Global
administration cancels mining leases near Commodity Insights. https://www.spglobal.
wilderness area. The New York Times. https:// com/commodityinsights/en/market-insights/
www.nytimes.com/2022/01/26/climate/ latest-news/energy-transition/082321-igo-tianqi-
boundary-waters-copper-mining.html successfully-produce-first-lithium-hydroxide-at-
australias-kwinana-refinery
45 Davenport, C. (2022, May 25). Biden
administration, settling a long feud, moves to 54 Department of Energy (DOE). (2022). Grid Energy
block a mine in Alaska. The New York Times. Storage: Supply Chain Deep Dive Assessment.
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/25/climate/ https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/
pebble-mine-alaska-epa.html files/2022-02/Energy%20Storage%20Supply%20
Chain%20Report%20-%20final.pdf
46 Scheyder, E. (2022, June 27). U.S. court upholds
Arizona land swap deal for Rio Tinto copper mine.
Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/us/us-
court-upholds-arizona-land-swap-deal-rio-tinto-
copper-mine-2022-06-25/
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 33

55 Weisenthal, J., & Alloway, T. (2022, April 18). 64 Reuters Staff. (2021, September 14). China
Transcript: This Is the Challenge of Securing the backs Congo’s ban on 6 small Chinese mining
Battery Supply Chain [Audio podcast episode]. In companies. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/
Odd Lots. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg. article/congo-mining-china-idUSL8N2QG3G2
com/news/articles/2022-04-18/transcript-this-is-
the-challenge-of-securing-the-battery-supply- 65 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
chain?srnd=oddlots Development. (2015, December 2). Chinese Due
Diligence Guidelines for Responsible Mineral
56 Yu, A., & Sumangil, M. (2021, February 16). Top Supply Chains. https://mneguidelines.oecd.
electric vehicle markets dominate lithium-ion org/chinese-due-diligence-guidelines-for-
battery capacity growth. S&P Global Market responsible-mineral-supply-chains.htm
Intelligence. https://www.spglobal.com/
marketintelligence/en/news-insights/blog/top- 66 China Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals
electric-vehicle-markets-dominate-lithium-ion- & Chemicals Importers & Exporters (CCCMC).
battery-capacity-growth (2015). Chinese Due Diligence Guidelines for
Responsible Mineral Supply Chains. https://www.
57 Tucker, T. (2022). Everything is Climate Now: globalwitness.org/documents/18138/201512_
New Directions for Industrial Policy from Biden’s Chinese_Due_Diligence_Guidelines_for_
Supply Chain Reports. Roosevelt Institute. Responsible_Mineral_Supply_Chains_-_En_
https://rooseveltinstitute.org/wp-content/ K83fxzt.pdf
uploads/2022/05/RI_EverythingClimateNow_
IssueBrief_202205-2.pdf 67 Idem.
58 Mayoral, A. (2022). U.S. Challenges in EV Battery 68 Links, S., de Feijter, T., & Lammertink, J. (2021).
Production. Coalition for a Prosperous America. Chinese Approaches to Overseas Responsible
https://prosperousamerica.org/wp-content/ Business Insights from the DRC Cobalt Industry.
uploads/2022/06/CPA-Batteries-Policy-Paper- Leiden Asia Centre. https://leidenasiacentre.nl/wp-
Web-1.pdf content/uploads/2021/10/Chinese-Approaches-
to-Overseas-Responsible-Business.pdf
59 AFP, Reuters. (2022, March 12). EU plans millions of
69 Global Witness. (2021). Digging for Disclosure.
e-vehicle batteries, jobs by 2025. Deutsche Welle.
https://www.globalwitness.org/en/campaigns/
https://www.dw.com/en/eu-plans-millions-of-e-
natural-resource-governance/digging-disclosure/
vehicle-batteries-jobs-by-2025/a-56857936
70 The Sentry. (2021). The Backchannel: State Capture
60 Lienert, P. (2021, October 27). U.S. battery startup
and Bribery in Congo’s Deal of the Century. https://
Redwood Materials sets deal with Korea’s L&F.
cdn.thesentry.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/
Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/
TheBackchannel-TheSentry-Nov2021.pdf
redwood-lf-batteries-idCNL1N2RM2DQ
71 Rights and Accountability in Development (RAID),
61 Wayland, M. (2022, May 20). Hyundai to invest $5.5
Centre d’Aide Juridico-Judiciaire (CAJJ). (2021).
billion to build EVs and batteries in Georgia. CNBC.
The Road to Ruin?: Electric Vehicles and Worker’s
https://www.cnbc.com/2022/05/20/hyundai-to-
Rights Abuses at DR Congo’s Industrial Cobalt
invest-5point5-billion-to-build-evs-and-batteries-
Mines. https://www.raid-uk.org/sites/default/
in-georgia.html
files/report_road_to_ruin_evs_cobalt_workers_
nov_2021.pdf
62 Kansas Office of the Governor. (2022, July 13).
Kansas lands $4b, 4,000-job panasonic energy
electric vehicle battery plant. https://governor. 72 Nyabiage, J. (2022, April 3). Chinese firm regains
kansas.gov/kansas-lands-4b-4000-job- control of DR Congo copper mine after agreeing
panasonic-energy-electric-vehicle-battery-plant/ to reach solution with government over royalty
disputes. South China Morning Post. https://
63 China Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/
& Chemicals Importers & Exporters (CCCMC). article/3172881/chinese-firm-regains-control-dr-
(2015). Guidelines for Social Responsibility congo-copper-mine-after
in Outbound Mining Investments (GSRM).
Ministry of Commerce, People’s Republic 73 Reuters Staff. (2021, September 14). China
of China. http://images.mofcom.gov.cn/ backs Congo’s ban on 6 small Chinese mining
csr2/201812/20181224151850626.pdf companies. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/
article/congo-mining-china-idUSL8N2QG3G2
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 34

74 Sterneberg, R., Coenraads, M., Hamster, J., 80 Swanson, A., & Buckley, C. (2022, June 6). Red
Kovaleva, A., Hitchcock, T., & Exten-Wright, J. flags for forced labor found in China’s car battery
(2022, February 24). European Commission supply chain. The New York Times. https://www.
proposal for the Corporate Sustainability nytimes.com/2022/06/20/business/economy/
Due Diligence Directive. DLA Piper. https:// forced-labor-china-supply-chain.html
www.dlapiper.com/fr/france/insights/
publications/2022/02/european-commission- 81 Links, S., de Feijter, T., & Lammertink, J. (2021).
proposal-corporate-sustainability/ Chinese Approaches to Overseas Responsible
Business Insights from the DRC Cobalt Industry.
75 European Parliament. (2022, March 03). New EU Leiden Asia Centre. https://leidenasiacentre.nl/wp-
rules for more sustainable and ethical batteries. content/uploads/2021/10/Chinese-Approaches-
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/ to-Overseas-Responsible-Business.pdf
headlines/economy/20220228STO24218/new-
eu-rules-for-more-sustainable-and-ethical- 82 Fussell, N., McAllister, A., Sanchez, F., & Zales, M.
batteries (2022, January 24). Breaking down the Uyghur
Forced Labor Prevention Act for U.S. importers.
76 The London Metal Exchange. (n.d.). Responsible Holland & Knight. https://www.hklaw.com/en/
Sourcing. Retrieved July 13, 2022. https://www. insights/publications/2022/01/breaking-down-
lme.com/Company/Responsibility/Responsible- the-uyghur-forced-labor-prevention-act-for-us-
sourcing importers
77 Initiative for Responsible Mining Assurance. 83 U.S. Department of the Treasury. (2018, June 15).
(n.d.). Standard. Retrieved July 13, 2022. https:// Treasury Sanctions Fourteen Entities Affiliated with
responsiblemining.net/ Corrupt Businessman Dan Gertler Under Global
Magnitsky. https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-
78 Responsible Minerals Initiative. (n.d.). Minerals Due releases/sm0417
Diligence. Retrieved July 13, 2022. https://www.
responsiblemineralsinitiative.org/minerals-due- 84 U.S. Department of the Treasury. (2021, December
diligence/ 06). Treasury Targets Corruption Linked to Dan
Gertler in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
79 London Bullion Market Association. (n.d.). https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/
Responsible Sourcing. Retrieved July 13, 2022. jy0515
https://www.lbma.org.uk/responsible-sourcing
China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 35

China’s Role in Supplying Critical Minerals for the Global Energy Transition 36