MARCH 2021
The Geopolitics of Critical
Minerals Supply Chains
AUTHOR
Jane Nakano
A Report of the CSIS Energy Security and Climate Change Program

About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research
organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S.
senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president
and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—
nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity
and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making
real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis,
and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that
aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and
the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the
thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be
understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2021 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank CSIS colleagues Sarah Ladislaw and Nikos Tsafos for feedback and Ian
Barlow for graphics assistance. The author would also like to thank Brandon Tracy of the U.S. Congressional
Research Service and Marco Giuli of the Brussels School of Governance for reviewing a draft.
This report was made possible by the generous support of the Japan External Trade Organization.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20036
202-887-0200 | www.csis.org
III | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

Contents
1 | Introduction 1
2 | The Chinese Dominance of the Global Critical Minerals Supply Chains 4
3 | Securing the Critical Minerals Supply Chains: Various Strategies and Policy Steps 7
4 | United States 9
Status of U.S. Supply Chains 9
U.S. Strategy and Responses 11
5 | European Union 15
Status of EU Supply Chains 15
EU Strategy and Responses 16
6 | Japan 19
Status of Japan’s Supply Chains 19
Japan’s Strategy and Responses 20
7 | Conclusion 23
8 | About the Author 26
IV | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

1
Introduction
Confronted with the rising threat of climate change, many governments around the world have
launched efforts to electrify their energy system while decarbonizing their electric power supply.
This trend has led to an increased demand for non-carbon-emitting sources of electricity and energy
storage technologies, and in turn has grown the demand for these technologies’ component minerals
and materials. According to a World Bank study, the demand for component minerals for electric storage
batteries—such as aluminum, cobalt, lithium, manganese, and nickel—could rise by more than 450 percent
by 2050 if clean energy technology is deployed at a level consistent with the Paris Climate Agreement goal
of keeping the rise in atmospheric temperature to no more than 2 degrees Celsius.1
Clean energy technology components have different degrees of reliance on a range of minerals, which
in turn have different criticality profiles informed by factors such as price volatility and the stability
of the supplier country. Rare-earth elements, such as neodymium, dysprosium and praseodymium,
are key ingredients of permanent magnets (powerful magnets that do not lose their magnetic fields),
which are used in high-performance wind turbines.2 Borates, gallium, germanium, and indium are
also important ingredients in solar photovoltaics (PV), while cobalt and lithium are required for the
lithium-ion batteries used in electric vehicles (EVs). Although these minerals are available globally,
some are highly concentrated in a few countries. For example, about half the global supply of cobalt
comes from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC); over 80 percent of the global supply of
lithium comes from Australia, Chile, and Argentina; and 60 percent of the global supply of manganese
comes from South Africa, China, and Australia.3 Most notably, over 85 percent of the global supply of
rare-earth elements comes from China.
Supply chain security for the minerals and materials needed in clean energy technologies has become a
strategic issue, not only because it could affect the pace of clean energy technology deployment around
1 | Jane Nakano

the world but also because clean energy technology has become the latest frontier for the geoeconomic
rivalries sparked by China’s competitive manufacturing sector. No longer a simple mineral producer
or component assembler, China is emerging as a higher-value manufacturer that requires a growing
volume of the minerals and metals that are considered key to clean energy technology manufacturing.
This development has increased the pressure for other major economies dependent on mineral
imports to secure their critical minerals supply chains.
An equally important factor is that China appears to recognize the strength of its critical minerals
supply chains as geopolitical leverage. For example, during one of the heightened phases of the
U.S.-China trade war in 2019, President Xi Jinping of China and his top trade negotiator toured a
rare-earth processing facility in Jiangxi Province, which is known for its rare-earth wealth. The visit
was widely interpreted as a reminder to the United States that China has leverage over the rare-earth
supply chains, bringing back the memory of China’s embargo on rare-earth exports to Japan, which
occurred over a territorial dispute in the fall of 2010. Additionally, Xi Jinping’s call in April 2020 for
the need to enhance global supply chains’ dependence on China and “develop powerful retaliation
and deterrence capabilities against supply cut-offs by foreign parties” has only fueled concern among
Western policymakers that heavy economic dependence on China for something as critical as rare-
earth minerals may translate into a vulnerability that can be exploited by China in the event of a clash
between China and the West.4
Furthermore, the Covid-19 pandemic has exposed fragility in the global supply chains for not only
pharmaceuticals and crucial medical supplies but also some critical minerals. For instance, the
transport of cobalt produced in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was delayed in South Africa
for months following the South African government’s imposition of a strict lockdown in the second
quarter of 2020.5
A confluence of these developments has elevated the strategic importance of securing critical minerals
supply chains, especially to a group of economies that are home to innovators and manufacturers.
Some governments have modernized or expanded existing strategies to address the challenge, while
others have outlined action plans or articulated their perspectives on only specific portions of the
supply chains. The author identified a select set of economies whose approach to the security of
critical minerals supply chains is likely to be consequential in terms of geopolitics. Through a literature
survey and interviews, the author reviewed the statuses of these economies’ critical minerals supply
chains as well as their strategies to address the supply security concern. This report illuminates the key
economic, security, and geopolitical factors behind the recent evolution of these economies’ strategies
and their approaches to the security of critical minerals supply chains.
Key observations include:
▪ The security of critical minerals supply chains is a strategic issue, in light of the expected
exponential demand growth led by clean energy technology deployment around the world.
▪ Sustained political commitment to technological innovation is essential to managing the growing
competition over resources and clean energy manufacturing value chains.
▪ China’s development of midstream and downstream capacities has turned it from a supplier of raw
minerals and materials to a key consumer of them. China’s commanding position along critical
minerals supply chains is a key factor that shapes other economies’ strategic responses.
2 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

▪ Different economies are motivated by different concerns reflecting the heterogeneity in
their resource endowment profiles and industrial structures. The United States appears most
concerned about import dependence that can be exploited geopolitically, while the European
Union and Japan appear primarily concerned with the effects of supply disruptions on their
industrial competitiveness.
▪ Recent efforts to strengthen critical minerals supply chains include the United States’
development of midstream capacities, the European Union’s orchestrated support for its battery
sector, and Japan’s stockpile modernization and resource development abroad.
▪ Competition over critical minerals supplies is also rising between import-dependent economies.
Such competition could hinder effective international partnerships that might otherwise mitigate
existing risks to supply chains.
3 | Jane Nakano

2
The Chinese Dominance
of the Global Critical
Minerals Supply Chains
China has become a dominant stakeholder in the global supply chains for critical minerals and
clean energy goods. In solar PV manufacturing (which broadly consists of the manufacturing of
polysilicon, ingots, wafers, cells, and modules), China is home to over 90 percent of the world’s
wafer manufacturing capacity, and Chinese companies—regardless of factory location—own two-thirds
of the global polysilicon manufacturing capacity and 72 percent of the global module manufacturing
capacity.6 In lithium-ion battery manufacturing, China has a majority of processing capacity for key
components (such as cathodes, anodes, separators, and electrolytes), as well as almost 80 percent of
global battery cell manufacturing capacity.7 Although less dominant, China still has a strong presence
in the wind turbine value chain: it is home to about half of total manufacturing plants for nacelles,
blades, wind towers, turbine generators, and gearboxes.8
China’s emergence as a major force along the clean energy technology value chain is partly the result
of their resource wealth, as China is home to roughly one-third of global rare-earth reserves. However,
this emergence also represents the culmination of long-term industrial policy, China’s capacity to
execute it, and advantages derived from a lag in extractive industry regulations.9
Where it lacks access to resources, China has invested in mining projects abroad. For example, since
nearly 60 percent of cobalt ore comes from the DRC, Chinese enterprises invest in cobalt mines and
participate in cobalt smelting projects there to secure stable access to cobalt resources.10 China has
come to account for 72 percent of the global cobalt refining capacity.11 The consumption of cobalt by
China—where approximately three-quarters of supply is used in lithium battery manufacturing—is
forecast to almost double between 2017 and 2023.12 Also, while China is only one of five countries that
produce lithium (another key mineral for lithium-ion battery production), it accounts for roughly 60
percent of global lithium refining capacity.13 China also leads the rest of the world in its capacity to
4 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

process these refined materials into components, mainly cathodes (producing 52 percent of the global
cathode supply), anodes (78 percent), separators (66 percent), and electrolytes (62 percent).14 In 2018,
for the first time in over three decades, China became a net importer of at least seven rare earths, as
domestic output declined due to a government crackdown on illegal production.15
China’s recognition of the strategic value of non-fuel minerals and their industrial applications dates
back at least to the seventh National Five-Year Plan for Rare Earth Industry (1986–1990), which made
it a priority to “develop research and production of advanced rare-earth applications and new materials
(e.g., permanent magnets and lasers) for domestic consumption and export.”16 The Chinese government
spurred the development of midstream and downstream sectors through investment policies that
allowed foreign investment in rare-earth smelting with the import of advanced technologies and
machinery and encouraged foreign investment and joint ventures in producing advanced products
downstream—all while prohibiting foreign investment and joint ventures in the mining sector.17
State-sponsored investment in research and development took off early in China. By 1985, there
were more than 300 research institutes and university research centers in China working on research
projects related to rare-earth mining, smelting, and applications.18 China has filed more rare-earth
patents than the rest of the world combined.19 Low-cost minerals and supply of materials attracted
many foreign firms to relocate to China, a situation that not only afforded these firms access to
the growing Chinese market but also benefitted the Chinese by enhancing China’s downstream
manufacturing capacity through technology transfer.
Clean Energy Mineral Supply Chains and Top Global Suppliers
Batteries, Wind, and Solar PV
Raw Materials Processed Materials Components Assembly
Co, Li, C, Nb Ni, Mn, Si, Cathode materials, Cathodes, Anodes, Li-ion cells
Cu, Ti, Al, P, F, Sn, Iron ore Anode materials Electrolytes, Separators
China Africa L.A.* Other China Japan EU China Japan EU China U.S. Asia**
32% 21% 21% 26% 52% 31% 8% 52% 31% 9% 66% 13% 13%
Raw Materials Processed Materials Components Assembly
Al, B, Cr, Cu, Dy, Pb, Mn, Aluminum, NdFeB magnets, Steel, Nacelles, Blades Wind turbines
Mo, Nd, Ni, Nb, Pr, Iron ore Copper wire, Carbon fibers, Glass fibers
China L.A.* Asia** Other China EU U.S. China EU U.S. EU China
54% 29% 6% 11% 41% 12% 9% 56% 20% 11% 58% 23%
Raw Materials Processed Materials Components Assembly
Al, B, Cd, Cu, Ga, Ge, In, Fe, Si-metal, Polysilicon, Crystalline / amorphous Si Cells, Si modules,
Pb, Mo, Ni, Se, Si, Ag, Te, Sn, Zn Cu refined, Al, CdTe Wafer Thin film Si / non-Si modules
China Africa U.S. Other China U.S. EU China Asia** China Asia** EU
53% 13% 7% 27% 50% 6% 5% 89% 1% 70% 8% 1%
* Latin America
** Excluding China and Japan
energy security and
Source: Created by Ian Barlow based on data from European Commission, Critical materials climate change program
for strategic technologies and sectors in the EU - a foresight study, 2020 (Brussels: European Commission, 2020).
5 | Jane Nakano

China has also employed export and production quotas. From 1999 to 2014, China imposed an annual
export quota. The export quota system was structured to favor firms that could create high additional
value.20 Moreover, in 2006, China introduced production quotas on rare-earth concentrates, with the
stated goal of controlling total production and illegal mining. These actions caused a spike in rare-earth
prices, given China’s strong position in the global supply. China’s export restrictions continued until
2014 when a World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute settlement panel agreed with the United States,
European Union, and Japan that China’s export duties and export quotas on rare earths, tungsten, and
molybdenum constituted a breach of WTO rules.21
More recently, the Chinese government identified “new materials,” such as permanent magnets, to
be among the 10 industries targeted for government support under the Made in China 2025 initiative.
This industrial initiative, released in 2015, aims to upgrade China’s manufacturing capacity by 2025
through focused allocation of resources, such as beneficial regulations, tax incentives, and financing
by public banks.22 The development of the new materials industry is seen as a foundation for the
successful development of Chinese manufacturing capacity in nine other industries, such as EVs, new
information technology, and aerospace.23 China’s heavy focus on expanding its technology innovation
capacity is likely to continue until at least 2035—a year identified by the Chinese Communist Party’s
Central Committee in October 2020 to be when China becomes the global technology leader.24
Since the Chinese government has been promoting domestic downstream industry, the country’s
consumption of rare-earth minerals has been on the rise. Between 2004 and 2014, China’s
consumption of rare-earth minerals grew at an average annual rate of 7.5 percent, while the rare-
earth mineral consumption of the rest of the world decreased by 3.8 percent, raising China’s share of
the global consumption from 43 to 70 percent.25 Moreover, China’s production of rare-earth end-use
products grew by about 70 percent between 2005 and 2015; by 2015, domestic consumption accounted
for over 80 percent of the domestic production of rare earths.26
In order to better position itself to weather potential supply disruptions, China’s National Mineral
Resource Plan for 2016–2020 called for establishing a range of capabilities, including a warning
mechanism for the rare-earth industry to safeguard its supply chains against various causes of
potential disruptions and a more systematic demand and supply analysis on mineral products.27 More
recently, in October 2020, China passed an export-control law that would restrict exports of controlled
items to protect China’s interest and security. Although the government has not elaborated or clarified
which items and technologies will fall under this law, rare earths are among the strong suspects.28
Furthermore, in early January 2021, China introduced draft legislation to “reinforce the protection of
its rare earth resources” and “strengthen full industrial chain regulation” by strengthening the approval
process for mining and processing projects, as well as the rare-earth trade.29 In reporting this proposal,
the state-run China Daily noted that China considers rare-earth elements to be “prized resources” with
“irreplaceable significance for the upgrade of traditional industries, and the development of emerging
industries.”30 These developments may also reflect China’s unease that the United States and other
major economies are beginning to seriously address their current vulnerability with regards to critical
minerals supply chains.
6 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

3
Securing the Critical
Minerals Supply Chains
Various Strategies and Policy Steps
Ac onfluence of factors—including growing competition over critical mineral supplies and clean
energy manufacturing, fragility in the global supply chains, and rising competition from China—
has led a few economies to review the state of their critical minerals supply chains in recent
years. Several of them have updated their strategies, expanded policy tools to address the challenge, or
introduced action plans to improve or preserve the security of critical minerals supply chains.
For example, India is noteworthy for its growing political focus on developing clean energy
manufacturing capacity. A 2016 report released by India’s Department of Science and Technology
presented an assessment of the effects the security of critical minerals supply may have on India’s
manufacturing sector, given the growing gap between the rising demand for technology-enabled
products and its domestic manufacturing capacity.31 India has been striving to grow its clean
energy manufacturing base, as exemplified by the Make in India program. This industrial initiative,
combined with goals to grow the installed capacity of renewable energy from about 90 gigawatts
(GW) currently to 450 GW and fully electrify the mobility sector by 2030, seems to be driving
India’s interest in developing relationships with resource-rich economies to secure access to critical
minerals.32 For example, India concluded a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with Australia in
June 2020 to secure supplies of critical minerals from Australia.33
Australia is another major stakeholder in the global supply chains for critical minerals. Australia
is rich in energy and natural resources, including many critical minerals, and home to some of the
top companies in global mining. The Australian government seeks to leverage ongoing efforts at
the state and territory levels, such as Western Australia’s initiative to capitalize on local minerals
for the lithium-ion battery industry and New South Wales’s effort to attract investment in metals
and rare-earth resources.34 In 2019, the Australian government issued its Critical Minerals Strategy
7 | Jane Nakano

in an effort to strengthen its mining and processing capacities by promoting investment and
incentivizing innovation.35
While the universe of economies seeking to enhance their competitiveness along the critical minerals
supply chain is growing, this report focuses on the United States, the European Union, and Japan,
evaluating the similarities, differences, and evolution of their respective critical minerals strategies.
Table 1: Comparing the Strategies/Responses
United States European Union Japan
Term Used Critical minerals. Critical and raw materials. Rare metals.
in Strategic
Documents
Key Interests/ Defense requirements; Industrial competitiveness Industrial
Considerations economic security; in clean energy sector. competitiveness.
industrial competitiveness. Political commitment to
No specific focus on clean climate neutrality.
energy sector.
Research and Domestic resource survey Separation and processing; Substitute development;
Innovation capacity; separation and substitute development; recycling technologies.
Focus processing; substitute recycling technologies.
development; recycling
technologies.
International Cooperation is alliance- Cooperation within and Trade and investment with
Cooperation oriented. The tone is near the European Union is resource-rich countries.
Focus confrontational against important. Funding to resource-rich
China. developing countries for
capacity building.
Domestic Land Permitting. Permitting. Not applicable.
Access Issue
Focus
Workforce Issue Extractive industry workers Extractive industry workers Expertise in substitution
Focus and processing expertise. and processing expertise. and recycling technology
researchers.
Critical Minerals 35 entries on the list. 30 entries on the list. 34 entries on the list.
List No regularly scheduled Regularly scheduled No regularly scheduled
criticality assessments. criticality assessments, criticality assessments.
Updates per the White every three years. The most METI updated the list
House. The most recent list recent list was published in sometime since 2014.
was published in 2019. 2020.
Stockpile For DOD use, managed by None at the EU or EU Stockpiling since 1983,
the DLA.36 member nation level.37 for industry use; national
(70%) and private industry
stocks (30%) both
managed by JOGMEC.
Note: These country strategy characteristics are relative and dynamic, and they are not to be viewed as comprehensive.
8 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

4
United States
Status of U.S. Supply Chains
The United States has a wealth of mineral resources and a strong tradition of mining. In fact, the
United States was once the global leader in the production of the rare-earth minerals key to the
high-performance magnets needed in clean energy technologies. From the mid-1960s through
the 1980s, the Mountain Pass mine in California was the largest source of rare-earth oxides in the
world. In addition to Mountain Pass, CA, other identified rare-earth deposits include Bokan Mountain,
AK; Bear Lodge, WY; Round Top, TX; and Elk Creek, NE.38
However, U.S. presence in the upstream and midstream of critical minerals supply chains is severely
limited today. Several decades of globalization, where countries have sought greater economic benefits
from closer integration of supply chains and trade, have led the United States to move much of its
manufacturing base abroad. These forces of globalization, together with U.S. policymakers’ decisions
to prioritize domestic environmental protection over import-dependence concerns, have shifted the
extraction and production of some key minerals, such as rare earths, outside of U.S. borders.39 By
2000, the United States had become almost entirely dependent on overseas imports—particularly from
China—for separated rare-earth oxides.
The Chinese rare-earth embargo of 2010 and the resultant volatility of rare-earth prices sharpened
the U.S. focus on critical minerals supply chain security, as well as on the geopolitical consequences
of unchecked dependency on a single source for these mineral and material supplies. By then, the
sole U.S. rare-earth mining project at Mountain Pass had become dormant.40 The subsequent decade
saw limited progress in reducing dependency. For example, Molycorp reopened its Mountain Pass
mine in 2012, but in the face of price declines due to the ample Chinese supply of many of the rare-
9 | Jane Nakano

earth elements, its operation became economically unsustainable, resulting in bankruptcy in 2015.41
While Mountain Pass has resumed operation under its new owner, MP Materials, all the rare-earth
concentrates from the Mountain Pass are currently exported for separation and processing, as the
United States lacks the domestic capability to separate rare-earth concentrates into rare-earth ores
and process them into rare-earth metals at a commercial scale.42 From 2015 to 2018, Chinese supplies
accounted for 80 percent of U.S. imports of rare-earth compounds and metals; additionally, U.S.
imports from other countries are largely derived from Chinese rare-earth inputs.43
A decade after China’s rare-earth embargo, however, U.S. momentum to address critical minerals
supply chain challenges is on the rise. Recent industry undertakings to reactivate domestic supply
chains include attempts by MP Materials and Lynas to establish processing capabilities for light
rare-earth elements in California and Texas, respectively, both of which are recipients of a Defense
Production Act Title III technology investment agreement.44 Several separation and processing projects
are also under development, including in Bokan Mountain in Alaska and Wheat Ridge, Colorado.45
There also are domestic developments further along the clean energy technology value chain. For
example, Nevada has become home to Tesla’s Gigafactory battery plant, soon to be followed by another
Tesla battery factory in Texas.46 More plants to manufacture batteries for EVs are planned for Georgia,
New York, North Carolina, and Ohio.47
U.S. IDENTIFICATION OF CRITICAL MINERALS
The U.S. Geological Survey has decades of expertise in tracking domestic mineral resource assessments,
but the first mineral supply chains assessment work specific to clean energy applications was issued by
the Department of Energy (DOE) in 2010. The DOE’s 2010 and 2011 Critical Materials Strategy reports
provided the findings from their criticality assessment on rare earths and other elements needed for
various energy applications, including the identification of critical minerals—14 minerals in the 2010
report and 16 minerals in the 2011 report.
Under Executive Order (EO) 13817, “A Federal Strategy to Ensure Secure and Reliable Supplies of
Critical Minerals,” issued in 2017, critical minerals are currently defined as:
(i) a non-fuel mineral or mineral material essential to the economic and national security of the
United States, (ii) the supply chains of which is vulnerable to disruption, and (iii) that serves an
essential function in the manufacturing of a product, the absence of which would have significant
consequences for our economy or our national security.
Per this definition, in May 2018, the U.S. government released a list of 33 minerals and two mineral
groups—platinum group metals and rare-earth elements—that are deemed critical and warned that
of the 35 entries, the United States relied on import for more than half of the annual consumption
of 31. Moreover, the United States lacks any domestic production (and thus is completely import-
reliant) for 14 of them.
10 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

U.S. Strategy and Responses
The availability of minerals has been an important issue for U.S. policymakers for decades, but
until the turn of the twenty-first century, it was mainly in the context of their value for defense
applications. This has rapidly changed in recent years. The supply of critical minerals has emerged
as a major economic security issue, which in turn has become a national security concern. This shift
emanated from a combination of growing U.S. import dependence and the market-distorting effects of
Chinese mineral export practices in the late-2000s.
2010 was a pivotal year for U.S. policymakers. In March, the Obama administration’s White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) began convening the Interagency Working Group
on Critical and Strategic Minerals Supply Chains to promote supply diversification, mitigate the
long-term risks associated with a dependence on critical minerals, establish federal R&D priorities,
promote environmentally sustainable mining, and prepare a next-generation workforce.48 Also
in 2010, the National Science and Technology Council’s Committee on Environment, Natural
Resources, and Sustainability chartered the Subcommittee on Critical and Strategic Mineral Supply
Chains to develop advice and provide assistance on policies, plans, and procedures for mitigating
mineral risks.49
In December 2010, shortly after the Chinese embargo of rare-earth element exports to Japan in
October 2010, the DOE issued its first-ever strategic document focused on the role of critical
minerals and materials in the clean energy economy, Critical Materials Strategy. The 2010 strategy
pointed to the potential growth in global consumption of critical materials commensurate with
the expansion of clean energy technology deployment in the future and stressed the importance
of global supply chain diversification, substitute materials development, and greater research into
the recycling and reuse of materials.50 In addition to material supply and demand projection, the
DOE undertook a review of the supply chains for four components in clean energy technologies
and presented areas for action by U.S. federal agencies, including but not limited to those under
DOE jurisdiction (e.g., research and development). This inaugural work was quickly followed
by the 2011 Critical Materials Strategy, with updates in areas such as criticality assessments and
market and technology analyses.
Moreover, the DOE’s 2015 Quadrennial Technology Review, which examined the status of energy-related
science and technology with medium-term commercialization potential, included a critical material
technology assessment that reported on key trends affecting material criticality for clean energy
components, such as permanent magnets for wind turbines and EVs. The DOE also outlined its R&D
goals and pathways for advancing its critical material technology work.51
The major U.S. government effort to assess the national security of critical minerals supply chains
under the Trump administration began with EO 13817, issued in December 2017. The document’s key
concern was the United States’ heavy import reliance for critical minerals, and it focused on various
current technological, technical, regulatory, and legal limitations to the increase of domestic mineral
production. In response to EO 13817, the National Science and Technology Council’s Subcommittee
on Critical Minerals prepared A Federal Strategy to Ensure Secure and Reliable Supplies of Critical Minerals
(hereafter referred to as the Federal Strategy), which was then released by the U.S. Department of
Commerce in June 2019. The strategy presented “6 Calls to Action, 24 goals, and 61 recommendations”
in pursuit of the following objectives52:
11 | Jane Nakano

. . . improve the ability of the advanced technology, industrial, and defense manufacturing sectors
that use critical minerals to adapt to emerging mineral criticality issues; reduce risks for American
businesses that rely on critical minerals; create a favorable U.S. business climate for production
facilities at different stages of critical mineral supply chains; and support the economic security
and national defense of the United States; all of which will reduce the Nation’s vulnerability to
critical mineral supply disruptions.
The types of issues covered under the “6 Calls to Action” were wide-ranging and included research,
development, and deployment (RD&D); supply chains and the manufacturing base; international trade
and cooperation; domestic resource assessment and upstream regulation; and workforce availability
and capacity. The strategy largely reflected the Trump administration’s general view that economic
security was national security, although it also underscored the benefit of international cooperation.
Analogous to the strong energy interdependence among North American economies, the United
States has close trading relationships with Canada and Mexico in critical minerals. For example,
the strategy noted that “Canada and Mexico supply all or part of U.S. consumption for many critical
minerals.”53 It also called for establishing policy consultation as well as R&D cooperation with like-
minded economies—such as Canada, Australia, the European Union, and Japan. Interestingly, one
of most notable multilateral endeavors under the Trump administration relative to critical minerals
supply chains was the Energy Resource Governance Initiative (ERGI), even though the Federal Strategy
did not specifically mention resource governance challenges. Launched in June 2019, the ERGI shed
light on the key linkages between demand for critical minerals, growth of renewable power generation
and battery technologies, and resource management and sector governance capacity-building in
resource-rich countries around the world.54 Its membership has expanded to include Australia and
the Philippines in the Asia-Pacific; Argentina, Brazil, and Peru in Central and South America; and
Botswana, the DRC, Namibia, and Zambia in Africa.55
Meanwhile, the Federal Strategy itself was notably silent on the growing global attention on these
minerals and their contribution to energy transition. Given that climate mitigation is likely the most
significant and dynamic demand multiplier for clean energy technology component minerals, the role
of critical minerals in the ongoing energy transition merited a much clearer recognition. However, the
introductory section merely noted that the minerals are used in “electricity generation, storage and
transmission systems.”56 In contrast, both “national security” and “national defense” appeared over a
dozen times throughout the Federal Strategy, underscoring its prominence as a consideration in the
U.S. government assessment of its supply chain’s vulnerability and response formulation.
Also, per EO 13817, the DOE issued “Critical Minerals Rare Earths Supply Chain: A Situational White
Paper” in April 2020. This placed a primary focus on the status of industry along the upstream and
midstream of the supply chains and underscored the alignment between the focus of EO 13817 and
ongoing DOE activities to diversify supply of critical materials (e.g., increasing domestic production,
separations, and processing). Additionally, the white paper also offered suggestions on how the U.S.
effort to diversify supply could be augmented.57
The 2017 executive order was followed by EO 13953 in September 2020, “Addressing the Threat to the
Domestic Supply Chain from Reliance on Critical Minerals from Foreign Adversaries and Supporting
the Domestic Mining and Processing Industries.” This executive order adopted a starkly sharper
tone on the role of China in the global supply chains for critical minerals. For example, the 2017
12 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

executive order did not once mention China, and the resultant Federal Strategy referenced China only
under 1 of its 24 goals (alluding to its 2010 rare-earth export embargo as an example of the risk of
heavy dependence on China).58 In contrast, under EO 13953, President Trump declared a “national
emergency” to deal with the threat to the U.S. economy and national security emanating from the
country’s dependency on China for these minerals. The order suggested the use of tariffs or quotas as
potential remedies and directed agencies to examine potential authorities and prepare agency-specific
plans to improve the supply chains. 59
In response to the 2020 executive order, the DOE released Critical Minerals and Materials in January
2021.60 The document complemented the white paper from a year earlier by providing greater
information on the DOE’s ongoing R&D work in the areas of diversifying supply chains, developing
critical mineral substitutes, and improving reuse and recycling. For example, the DOE has made key
investments in efforts to produce rare-earth elements from sources such as coal and coal byproducts
and in developing new magnet alloys and new phosphor materials to reduce rare-earth elements
requirements. In the area of reuse and recycling, DOE efforts have advanced the disassembly and
recovery of rare-earth magnets from hard disk drives, for example.61 In laying out their R&D objectives
under detailed categories of goals, the DOE underscored how the R&D ecosystem can contribute to
solving a host of challenges. National laboratories working on the critical minerals supply chains
include the National Energy Technology Laboratory, the Critical Materials Institute (led by Ames
Laboratory), and the ReCell Lithium Battery Recycling R&D Center at Argonne National Laboratory.
Also, the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) has awarded projects related to
improving the recovery of critical minerals to advance the reuse and recycle objective.62
The inauguration of the Biden administration likely ushers in a unique alignment of policy priorities
and considerations that could yield a more comprehensive strategy on critical minerals supply chains
for the United States. First and foremost, climate change mitigation is the top administration priority.
The Biden administration seeks to deliver on its mid-century carbon neutrality commitment through
the accelerated deployment of clean energy technologies across industries, for example by ridding
the power sector of carbon sources by 2035 and by massively electrifying the transportation sector.
A month after the inauguration, the Biden administration issued EO 14017, “Executive Order on
America’s Supply Chains” and called for an immediate review of vulnerabilities in the supply chains for
critical minerals and high-capacity batteries, including electric vehicle batteries.63 Identifying climate
mitigation as a key driver for clean energy technology deployment, the administration underscored
the linkage between the supply chain security and the U.S. ability to accelerate its leadership of clean
energy technologies.64
The administration may also roll out measures to hold China accountable for its practices relative to
minerals and materials that put U.S. companies at a disadvantage, as outlined in the Biden campaign
plan to “rebuild U.S. supply chains and ensure the U.S. does not face future shortages of critical
equipment,” in which key raw materials are noted.65 This could be one of more immediate steps
available to the administration, as other measures to strengthen the supply chains—such as upstream
project developments and R&D endeavors—are more incremental in nature. The efficacy of pursuing
a trade case, for example, would need to be weighed carefully against the risk of politically-motivated
supply disruptions and their effects on U.S. supply chains when a pool of alternative suppliers—as well
as the availability of substitutes—remains limited for some of the critical minerals.
13 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

Additionally, Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm remarked at her confirmation hearing in January
2021 that she “enthusiastically” supports the DOE’s role in critical minerals “for both jobs and
energy security and supply chain security in the United States.” Her view clearly comports with the
administration’s commitment to create jobs, as exemplified by the issuance of EO 14005, “Ensuring
the Future is Made in All of America by All of America’s Workers.”66 However, what is less clear is how
and whether the effort to rebuild the manufacturing base for clean energy technology components
will translate into revitalizing upstream job opportunities, especially because the same political force
behind the deployment of clean energy technologies has generally been adverse to the extraction of
hydrocarbon resources in the past.
14 | Jane Nakano

5
European Union
Status of EU Supply Chains
The European Union consists of a variety of economies in terms of their resource endowments
and industrial structures. Some of the EU member economies are mineral producers and
suppliers. For example, Germany accounts for 8 percent of the global production of gallium (used
in PV thin films), Finland accounts for 10 percent of the global production of germanium (used in
multi-junction solar cells), Spain accounts for 31 percent of the global production of strontium (used
in anode for solid oxide fuel cells), and France accounts for 49 percent of the global production of
hafnium (used in super-alloys for space applications).67 EU members also include major manufacturers
of solar PV components, wind turbines, and EVs, such as Germany, Denmark, France, Italy, Spain, and
Switzerland. In fact, Germany is home to some of the world’s leading manufacturers of these clean
energy components.
Europe’s focus has traditionally been on the refining and manufacturing industries rather than the
extractive industry.68 A combination of limited understanding of resource availability within the
European Union and economic and societal hurdles seems to have hampered upstream development,
leading to the relative absence of the European Union from the upstream portion of global supply
chains for many minerals.69 This is clearly the case for the critical minerals supply for wind turbine
technology and EV batteries. The European Union produces no more than 1 percent of the minerals
that are needed for wind turbine technology (rare earths among them) or lithium-ion battery
technology (e.g., cobalt, natural graphite, and lithium).70 EU capacity is also limited in the processing
phase for component minerals for wind turbines, PV cells and modules, and batteries, making up about
10 percent of the global supply for wind turbines and batteries and about 5 percent for PV cells and
modules.71 EU manufacturing capacity for components for the three clean energy technologies is more
15 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

variable. While the European Union accounts for about 20 percent and 10 percent of the global total in
wind turbine and battery component manufacturing, respectively, EU capacity is effectively absent in
the PV component manufacturing phase.72
EU IDENTIFICATION OF CRITICAL MINERALS
Since 2011, the European Commission has been issuing a list of critical and raw minerals every three
years; the latest update was released in September 2020. The list expanded from 14 entries in 2011 to
20 in 2014, 27 in 2017, and 30 in 2020. The 30 entries consist of 27 minerals and three mineral groups:
heavy and light rare-earth elements (counted separately) and platinum group metals.
The commission assessed 83 individual raw materials before finalizing the 2020 list, which was
included in the Critical Raw Materials Resilience. The assessment work was led by the Ad hoc Working
Group on Defining Critical Raw Materials, a sub-group of the Raw Materials Supply Group, which in
turn is an expert group of the European Commission.
EU Strategy and Responses
The security of critical minerals supply chains formally became an EU agenda item in the late-2000s with
the launch of the Raw Materials Initiative in 2008. The main aim of the Raw Materials Initiative was
to ensure fair and sustainable supply of minerals and materials from global markets and to encourage
efficient resource supply through recycling. The initiative emanated from growing recognition by EU
member governments that the lack of an integrated policy response to market-distorting practices would
limit the European Union’s ability to secure raw materials at “fair and undistorted prices.”73 The European
Commission argued that distortion of international trade in raw minerals and materials is arising from
the industrial strategies of emerging economies—such as China, Russia, India, and South Africa—that
aim to protect their resource base in order to generate advantages for their downstream industries.74
Also notable in the Raw Materials Initiative was its clear recognition that minerals, such as rare earths
and cobalt, are important for Europe’s shift toward developing innovative “environmental-friendly [sic]”
technologies and products.75 In 2012, the commission established the European Innovation Partnership
on Raw Materials to carry out the Raw Materials Initiative.
A decade later, the European Union sees secure and sustainable supply of critical minerals as an ongoing
challenge which has risen in strategic importance as the European Union strives to deliver on the two
inter-linked agendas of meeting its climate neutrality goal and preserving industrial competitiveness.
Pursuing the robust deployment of clean energy technologies could exacerbate the current level of
import-dependence for critical minerals and materials if the supply security issue is left unaddressed.
This potential trade-off has become a disquieting issue for the European Union, which is already
concerned that global competition for these resources has become fierce. Critical Raw Materials Resilience:
Charting a Path towards greater Security and Sustainability, issued in September 2020, is the European
Union’s most recent strategic document focusing on the supply security of critical minerals. Prepared by
the Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and Small-Medium Enterprises,
Critical Raw Materials Resilience included a list of critical minerals and an action plan to increase the
resilience of critical minerals supply chains for the European Union, with the following four aims76:
16 | Jane Nakano

▪ Develop resilient value chains for EU industrial ecosystems;
▪ Reduce dependency on primary critical raw materials through circular use of resources,
sustainable products, and innovation;
▪ Strengthen the sustainable and responsible domestic sourcing and processing of raw materials in
the European Union; and
▪ Diversify supply with sustainable and responsible sourcing from third countries, strengthening
rules-based open trade in raw materials and removing distortions to international trade.
In clear recognition that the demand for clean energy technologies is the leading factor affecting its
critical minerals demand and industrial competitiveness, the European Commission also released the
Critical Raw Materials for Strategic Technologies and Sectors in the EU – A Foresight Study to accompany
the Resilience document. The report not only provided the outlook for demand in minerals and
materials in 2030 and 2050 but also detailed the risk analysis for the critical minerals supply chains
per technologies and sectors that have strategic importance to the European Union. Among its 2050
outlook highlights are a 60-fold growth in lithium demand, a 15-fold growth in cobalt demand, and a
10-fold growth in demand for the rare earths used in permanent magnets.77
Immediately following the release of Critical Raw Materials Resilience, in September 2020, the European
Raw Materials Alliance was launched to identify barriers, opportunities, and investment cases to build
capacity at all stages of the critical minerals value chain.78 The establishment of this alliance was the first
of 10 actions presented in Critical Raw Materials Resilience. The alliance will complement the ongoing EU
work on the battery value chain being pursued through the European Battery Alliance, an initiative that
was established by the European Commission in 2017 and supported by the European Investment Bank.
The EU strategy on the security of critical minerals supply chains has evolved to reflect emerging global
challenges. First and foremost is climate change. The 2008 strategic document noted the linkage between
the supply of critical minerals and the European Union’s drive to develop and innovate environmental-
friendly technologies. In the 2020 version, climate change is a prominent focus, both as a key reason
for the anticipated expansion of clean energy technology deployment (thus necessitating a secure
supply of critical minerals) and as an issue on which the European Union seeks to become a global
champion. Positioning itself to seize the economic and industrial opportunities that may arise from
the required efforts of mitigating climate change effects, the mineral resilience strategy synergizes well
with the European Union’s 2019 Green Deal. The sustainable use of natural resources, such as minerals
for clean energy technologies, comports to one of the two key objectives of the Green Deal: to promote
the efficient use of resources by moving to a circular economy.79 For example, in order to underpin the
sustainability and circularity of battery consumption, the European Commission decided in November
2020 to modernize EU legislation on batteries to facilitate their collection, repurposing, and recycling.80
The shift in the global economic landscape—from one based on the neo-liberal notion of shared
prosperity through greater integration of supply chains and trade to one that is more fragmented and
inward-looking—is another key challenge that is shaping the European Union’s response to its critical
minerals supply chain security. At the launch of the European Raw Materials Alliance, for example,
Germany’s minister for economic affairs and energy noted the “growing international protectionism”
on raw materials and remarked on the importance of supporting EU companies and stakeholders
along the supply chain.81 This shift is the backdrop for both growing concern among policymakers over
17 | Jane Nakano

minerals supply availability and the interest in greater intra-EU solutions to leverage complementarity
among member economies with different supply chain capacities. Both the Critical Raw Materials
Resilience and A New Industrial Strategy for Europe, another communication by the European
Commission, released in March 2020, feature the notion of “strategic autonomy.”82 The term is nothing
new in European politics, particularly on the issue of transatlantic diplomacy.83 However, the concept
has recently expanded to clearly include the notion of “reducing dependence on others for things
[the European Union] need[s] the most,” such as critical minerals.84 As the European Union seeks
to enhance its upstream capacity and that of nearby countries, some new mining projects are under
development, such as a lithium mining project in the Czech Republic and a lithium-borate project
in Serbia.85 Also, interest in nurturing its battery industry seems to be driving the European Union’s
plan to roll out strict environmental and labor requirements for batteries, as this could protect the EU
battery market from cheaper Asian imports.86
There is one particular difference between the U.S. and EU strategic responses to the critical minerals
supply chains challenge: China. In Critical Raw Materials Resilience, the European Commission articulates
its concern that the European Union’s growing critical mineral demand may essentially mean replacing
its existing import dependence for fossil fuels with the future import dependence for raw minerals and
materials. However, unlike the U.S. response that has become increasingly antagonistic to China, the
European Commission refrains from naming China as its chief competitor for critical mineral supplies
and clean energy technology manufacturing. Nor does the European Union call out Chinese behavior as
the primary cause for concern in the sound working of global supply chains. This difference in tone may
reflect not only the intensifying geopolitical rivalry between the United States and China but also the
strategic calculus for the European Union to preserve amicable economic ties with China. This is partly to
hedge against the relative decline in U.S. geoeconomic influence and partly to not preempt the prospect
for stronger and more balanced economic ties with China, as exemplified by multiyear efforts to conclude
the EU-China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment.
The third major global challenge is the Covid-19 economic crisis. In fact, the European Commission
specifically noted in Critical Raw Materials Resilience that the Covid-19 pandemic revealed “how fast
and how deeply global supply chains can be disrupted.”87 The EU economic recovery plan, issued in
May 2020, identified critical minerals and materials as one of the areas where Europe needs to be
more resilient in preparation for future shocks.88 The pandemic-induced sense of vulnerability appears
to have amplified the European Union’s interest in enhancing its “strategic autonomy” by increasing
supply capacity within the European Union.89 The EU Covid-19 recovery plan is thus seen as an enabler
of enhanced resilience, as it relates to the critical minerals supply chains.
The European Union may rely more heavily on financing and trade rules to advance its interests in
the global competition over green mineral supply chains. For example, the European Investment Bank
(EIB) has recently adopted a new energy lending policy that would enable the bank to support projects
related to the supply of critical raw materials needed for low-carbon technologies in the European
Union. The European Union looks to the EIB to help de-risk such projects and attract more private
investment, both within the European Union and in resource-rich third countries.90 Additionally,
viewing the integrated value chains as a “fundamental growth engine” and key for economic recovery,
the European Commission’s communication on pandemic economic recovery has suggested a “trade
policy review” to ensure the uninterrupted global flow of goods and services.91
18 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

6
Japan
Status of Japan’s Supply Chains
Japan is a manufacturing economy that is significantly import-dependent for natural resources,
including critical minerals. While a sizable indium mine used to exist in the northern island of
Hokkaido, the mine ceased operation in 2006, making Japan entirely dependent on imports for
indium supplies.92 Japan’s presence is severely lacking in the upstream, but it does have a substantial
rare-earth processing and manufacturing industry. For example, Japanese companies account for
around 15 percent of annual global magnet production.93 Specifically for the global market for high-
performance NdFeB permanent magnets, three Japanese corporations—Hitachi Metals, Shin-Etsu
Chemical, and TDK—had a 48 percent share as of the mid-2010s.94 The Japanese capacity in the magnet
industry stems from early inventions in the process and the acquisition of attendant intellectual
property rights. Consequently, major manufacturers of sintered NdFeB magnets, including China and
Germany, currently license the right to manufacture and sell these batteries from Hitachi.95
19 | Jane Nakano

JAPAN’S IDENTIFICATION OF CRITICAL MINERALS
Japan’s first list of critical minerals was prepared by the Advisory Committee on Mining Industry in
1984, under the direction of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (the predecessor of the
current METI). The list appears to have stayed constant in the subsequent decades. For example, the
same set of minerals appears in the 2014 METI document, where the minerals are considered critical
and thus merit policy focus and financial support to address their supply chain security.
The list has been updated since 2014 to now include 32 critical minerals and two mineral groups—
platinum group metals and rare-earth elements. Some minerals, such as palladium, have been
removed, while others, such as fluorine and silicon metals, have been added since 2014.
Japan’s Strategy and Responses
Viewing its economic security as almost synonymous to its national security, the Japanese government
has long approached the security of critical minerals and materials supply chains as a top priority.
Given the absence of domestic upstream capacity, Japan pursued securing its critical minerals supply
chains through trade, investment in mining projects overseas, stockpiling, and R&D in substitutes
and recycling technologies. The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) leads the policy
work, while Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC) is the key implementing actor.
JOGMEC is affiliated with METI and has the statutory authority to make strategic investments abroad
to enhance Japan’s energy security.
As early as the mid-1980s, Japan was concerned with the supply shortages that may arise from
the slow pace of upstream development around the world and the anticipated demand growth for
the minerals required for high-tech goods. As a result, in 1983, the Japanese government began
stockpiling seven minerals—including tungsten, cobalt, and vanadium, three of the minerals that are
commonly identified as critical by the United States, the European Union, and Japan today.96 However,
determining that stockpiling is insufficient to mitigate longer-term risks to its critical minerals supply
chains, the Japanese government also began to increase its focus on technology R&D.97
Japanese policymakers have taken a more strategic approach to the security of critical minerals supply
chains since the early-2000s. In July 2007, METI issued Measures to Secure the Stable Supply of Rare Metals
Going Forward.98 This underscored the importance of “resource diplomacy” to enhance access to overseas
mining projects, in addition to the existing focus on mineral reuse, R&D on substitutes, and stockpiling.99
In particular, the Japanese government decided in 2008 to augment its resource diplomacy capability
through the use of foreign aid, public finance, and trade insurance.100 In anticipation of future supply
disruptions, Japan further introduced Strategies to Secure Rare Metals in 2009, where it clarified both its
policy tools and focus areas around four key pillars: securing resources overseas, recycling, substitute
development, and stockpiling.101 To date, overseas rare-earth development projects Japan initiated or
entered into partnerships with a host country for include the Mount Weld project in Australia, the
Don Pao project in Vietnam, and the Indian Rare Earth project in India, as well as the partnership with
Lynas of Australia on a separation and purification plant in Malaysia.102
For Japanese policymaking on critical minerals supply chains, 2010 was a pivotal year. In the
aftermath of the Chinese embargo on rare-earth exports to Japan in the fall, the Japanese
government grew alarmed with the potential exodus of Japanese midstream capacities to China, as
20 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

the Chinese government had introduced a 25 percent export tax and 17 percent value-added tax;
there was no such tax obligations if the foreign company manufactured inside China using local
rare earths and then exported.103 In response, the Japanese government introduced measures,
including 39 billion Japanese Yen package ($3.9 billion when $1=JPY100) to help Japanese firms
cover the cost of building various capacities within Japan to mitigate the effects of material
shortfalls.104 The effectiveness of this particular measure may be mixed or muted, however, as
several Japanese companies nonetheless moved permanent magnet manufacturing factories to
China between 2014 and 2018.105
Also, in the early-2010s, having become particularly sensitive to the sense of equity among resource-
rich countries and the attendant rise in resource nationalism, Japan expanded its resource strategy
to include a focus on contributing to the economic development of a resource-rich country by
considering the provision of technical expertise in areas such as resource surveying, local irrigation
systems, and human resource development.106
In the area of R&D, one of Japan’s key focuses has been on developing a production process that reduces
the use of critical minerals. Products and components resulting from Japan’s R&D efforts to reduce the
use of rare earths include abrasives and certain types of magnets.107 R&D on material reduction and
substitutes has also been among the most active areas of Japan’s cooperation with the United States.
Additionally, submarine deposits of critical minerals in Japan’s territorial waters have become a recent
focus of Japan’s R&D endeavors. Between 2013 and 2017, six deposits were discovered off the southern
island of Okinawa. Critical mineral deposits, including those containing cobalt and nickel, are under
resource survey and various technical evaluations to ascertain their commercial feasibility.108
A combination of Japanese strategies to seek non-Chinese upstream capacity, reuse materials, and
develop substitutes has resulted in the reduction of Japanese reliance on Chinese rare-earth supplies
from 85 percent in 2009 to 58 percent in 2018.109 Japan’s official target by 2025 is to reduce its rare-
earth import reliance on a single supplier country below 50 percent, as well as to increase its self-
sufficiency in meeting cobalt demand to 50 percent.110
In March 2020, Japan released its latest perspective on how to secure its supply chains for critical
minerals and materials as part of the New International Resource Strategy. The strategy underscored
the growing importance of critical minerals for EVs and renewable power generation equipment in
the context of the carbon emissions mitigation effort. In formulating the strategy, policymakers took
into account rising resource competition with the United States, Europe, China, and various emerging
economies.111 Under this strategy, the Japanese government called for better aligning mineral-specific
criticality profiles and policy tools, reviewing the stockpile system, promoting international collaboration
on research, and focusing on innovation related to mineral recycling, among other goals.112
Per the New International Resource Strategy, Japan’s national parliament passed legislation in June
2020 to amend and expand the scope of JOGMEC’s financial functions in aiding Japanese businesses’
involvement in upstream projects abroad. Prior to the amendment, JOGMEC’s equity activities were
limited to exploration, acquisition of existing development and production assets, and investment in
refining activities tied to mining. The amendment expanded JOGMEC’s scope to include the ability
to continue financing a project that progressed from the exploration phase to the development and
production phase.113
21 | Jane Nakano

Moreover, the Japanese stockpile will expand beyond the original seven minerals and increase the
reserve level from 60 days of domestic consumption equivalent to as much as 180 days for some of
them.114 This would signify major modernization of Japan’s rare metal stockpiling policy; what goes
into the strategic reserve (seven minerals) at what reserve level (60-day domestic consumption
equivalent) had remained the same since the stockpile system was established in the mid-1980s.115
While the centrality of industrial competitiveness has served as the core driver of Japan’s approach to
strengthening the security of its critical minerals supply chains, its recent priority-setting has been
attuned to major global developments, such as the Covid-19 pandemic. In particular, the disruption
in supply chains for key electronic and automobile components from Asia during the pandemic
heightened Japan’s sense of vulnerability. Seeking to enhance the resilience of Japan’s supply chains,
the Japanese government passed several budgets in JFY2020 (April 2020–March 2021), totaling $5.45
billion (when US$1 = JPY100), to aid Japanese manufacturers of goods “whose production is highly
concentrated in select countries overseas and the disruptions in whose supply chains could deal
significant damage to the economy,” such as critical minerals. This aid aims to reshore manufacturing
capacity or to relocate it to elsewhere with a lower risk of supply disruptions.116
Minerals Identified as “Critical”
United States, Japan, and the European Union
Japan
Carbon (C)
Fluorine (F)
Thallium (Tl)
Barium (Ba)
Molybdenum (Mo)
Nickel (Ni)
Selenium (Se)
U.S. + Japan + EU
Antimony (Sb)
Beryllium (Be)
U.S. + Japan Japan + EU
Bismuth (Bi)
Cesium (Cs) Silicon metal (Si) Cobalt (Co)
Chromium (Cr) Boron (B) Gallium (Ga)
Manganese (Mn) Germanium (Ge)
Rubidium (Rb) Hafnium (Hf)
Rhenium (Re) Indium (In)
Tellurium (Te) Lithium (Li)
Zirconium (Zr) Magnesium (Mg)
Niobium (Nb)
Strontium (Sr)
Tantalum (Ta)
Titanium (Ti)
Tungsten (W)
Vanadium (V)
Platinum group metals
U.S. EU Rare-earth elements
Arsenic (As) Phosphorus (P)
Helium (He) U.S. + EU Coking coal
Potash / Potassium (P) Phosphate rock
Scandium (Sc)
Tin (Sn) Rubber (natural)
Aluminum (Al) / Bauxite
Uranium (U)
Barite (BaSO)
4
Flurospar
Graphite (natural)
Source: Created by Ian Barlow based on Department of the Interior, "Final List of Critical Minerals 2018," Federal
Register 83, No. 97 (May 18, 2018): 23295-6, https://www.federalregister.gov/docu- energy security and
ments/2018/05/18/2018-10667/final-list-of-critical-minerals-2018; European Commission, Critical Raw Materials climate change program
Resilience: Charting a Path towards Greater Security and Sustainability (Brussels: European Commission,
September 3, 2020); Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Issues for Consideration in Formulating A New
International Resource Strategy [author's translation] (Tokyo: Government of Japan, October 4, 2019).
22 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains
Sb, Be, Bi,
Co, Ga, Ge, Hf,
In, Li, Mg, Nb, Sr,
Ta, Ti, W, V,
Platinum group metals,
Rare earth elements

7
Conclusion
Key economies with innovation and manufacturing bases that are import-dependent for
critical minerals face emerging geoeconomic competition over the supply chains of critical
minerals. Clean energy technologies play an important role in mitigating the worst effects
of the global climate crisis, and as such, demand is expected to grow for clean energy technologies
and for their component critical minerals. These forces, combined with the geopolitical
uncertainty stemming from China’s ascent and the fragility in global supply chains as illuminated
by the Covid-19 pandemic, enhance the strategic importance of strengthening supply chains
for critical minerals and materials. Successfully securing supply chains has implications beyond
access to these minerals—it affects one’s ability to preserve or enhance competitiveness in
advanced technology manufacturing, such as EVs.
Greater recognition of the issue on the heels of the 2010 Chinese rare-earth export embargo and
the WTO victory in 2014 has not appeared to materially improve current import-dependence for
critical minerals by key economies such as the United States and the European Union. However,
there are indications that progress is being made. For example, the U.S. strategy is beginning
to show promise, with the launch of several domestic separation/processing and component
manufacturing projects. The EU effort is gaining momentum in the area of reuse and recycle, while
intra-EU upstream development may leverage additional resources from the post-Covid economic
recovery plan. Meanwhile, Japan’s focused approach on partnering with resource-rich countries for
mineral supplies and on advancing the development of reduce, reuse, and recycle technologies has
effectively reduced its dependence on Chinese rare earths, although the country remains import-
dependent for critical mineral supplies.
23 | Jane Nakano

Different economies are motivated by different concerns that reflect their resource endowment
profiles and industrial structures. The United States appears most concerned with securing
uninterrupted access to critical minerals-based components for defense applications, as
well as reducing substantial import dependence on a single supplier that could be exploited
geopolitically. Meanwhile, the European Union and Japan appear primarily concerned with securing
uninterrupted access to affordably-priced critical minerals and processed materials to protect their
industrial competitiveness and domestic manufacturers. While likely inevitable, this lack of a common
definition of “security” as it relates to critical minerals supply chains may be one barrier to effective
multilateral partnerships on this matter.
The experiences of key economies suggest that the availability of domestic mineral supplies is hardly
the sole indispensable factor in one’s ability to have secure supply chains. For instance, the lack of
domestic capacity to separate and process rare-earth concentrates has limited the United States from
fully capitalizing on its rare-earth mineral supplies at Mountain Pass. Moreover, Chinese experience
with the DRC shows that one need not hold major domestic cobalt deposits to become dominant in
subsequent midstream and downstream phases along the value chain.
The potential contribution of domestic upstream capacity presents an interesting question in
the context of the United States and Europe. In both economies, the environmental and climate-
mitigation movement has favored renewable power sources and clean energy technologies,
sometimes at the exclusion of lower-carbon fossil fuels, such as natural gas. The use of hydrocarbon
resources has come under scrutiny in phases ranging from resource extraction, to domestic
combustion, to export for use in a power or industrial sector abroad. Balancing concerns on import
dependence with the public acceptance of domestic mineral production is a public policy issue that
merits robust discussion.
Another important issue is the tension between national economic security concerns and
commercial concerns. The former relates to issues such as energy import dependence and industrial
competitiveness from a national perspective, while the latter relates to corporate interests in
preserving market share and maximizing profits. Would a manufacturer procure domestically sourced
minerals if they were much more expensive than foreign supplies, even in the name of national
interest to develop more secure critical minerals supply chains?
The security of supply chains for the minerals and materials needed in clean energy technologies
has become a strategic issue, not only because it could affect the pace of clean energy technology
deployment but also because clean energy technology has become the latest frontier for geoeconomic
rivalries. Competition over critical mineral supplies and the technical capacities to turn them into
clean energy goods is increasing. Major economies are reexamining the security of their critical
minerals supply chains and refining their strategies in order to enhance their security. While the U.S.
approach is multipronged, reflective of its mineral wealth as well as its strong innovation base, EU and
Japanese approaches favor innovation to drive the reduction, reuse, and recycling of materials. What
exactly drives each economy’s strategy to enhance the security of critical minerals may differ, but their
efforts warrant sustained political commitment, especially in the area of technology innovation. It was
innovation and ingenuity—in the form of combined application of hydraulic fracturing and horizontal
drilling for shale oil and gas extraction—that played a central role in turning the public concern
over “peak oil” from one about finite supply to one about declining demand. Innovation has helped
24 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

to diminish oil’s currency as a geopolitical asset and altered the geopolitics between oil-producing
economies as well as their relationships with oil import-dependent economies. Will innovation play a
similar role in altering the geopolitics of critical minerals supply chains? A race is on for innovation. It
is a race that could make every economy a winner if the outcome significantly improves the security of
supply chains for minerals and materials and facilitates the deployment of clean energy technologies
that are essential in addressing the existential threat of climate change.
25 | Jane Nakano

8
About the Author
Jane Nakano is a senior fellow in the Energy Security and Climate Change Program at the Center
for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). Her research interests include U.S. energy policy;
global market and policy developments concerning natural gas, nuclear energy, and critical
minerals; and energy security and climate issues in the Asia-Pacific region. She frequently writes and
speaks on these issues at domestic and international conferences and to media around the world. She
has also testified before Congress on U.S. liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports and before the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission on U.S.-China nuclear energy cooperation. Prior to joining
CSIS in 2010, Nakano worked in the Office of Policy and International Affairs in the U.S. Department
of Energy, where she covered a host of energy, economic, and political issues in Asia. From 2001 to
2002, she served at the U.S. embassy in Tokyo as special assistant to the energy attaché. Nakano
graduated from Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service and holds a master’s degree from
Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs.
26 | Jane Nakano

Endnotes
1 Kirsten Hund, Daniele La Porta, Thao P. Fabregas, Tim Laing, and John Drexhage, Minerals for Climate Action:
The Mineral Intensity of the Clean Energy Transition (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2020), 11, http://pubdocs.
worldbank.org/en/961711588875536384/Minerals-for-Climate-Action-The-Mineral-Intensity-of-the-Clean-
Energy-Transition.pdf.
2 Rare earths are a group of 17 elements composed of scandium, yttrium, and the lanthanides. They are difficult
and costly to extract and process, although they are relatively abundant across the world.
3 Tsisilile Igogo, Debra Sandor, Ahmad Mayyas, and Jill Engel-Cox, Supply Chain of Raw Materials Used in the
Manufacturing of Light-Duty Vehicle Lithium-Ion Batteries (Golden, CO: National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
August 2019), vi, https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/73374.pdf.
4 Tetsushi Takahashi, “A future in which China no longer needs the world but the world cannot spin without it,”
Financial Times, December 15, 2020, https://www.ft.com/content/ad93c3ba-3fd4-4005-97ba-ffe8bbd3c964.
5 Jacqueline Holman and Jia Hui Tan, “Cobalt hydroxide shipments from South Africa ongoing; concerns lift
price sentiment,” S&P Global Platts, January 12, 2021, https://www.spglobal.com/platts/en/market-insights/
latest-news/electric-power/011221-cobalt-hydroxide-shipments-from-s-africa-ongoing-concerns-lift-price-
sentiment-sources.
6 Sarah Ladislaw et al., Industrial Policy, Trade, and Clean Energy Supply Chains (Washington, DC: Center for
Strategic and International Studies, and BloombergNEF, February 2021), 10-11, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
industrial-policy-trade-and-clean-energy-supply-chains.
7 Ibid., 10.
8 Ibid., 11–12.
9 The process of separating the individual rare-earth elements from each other is a chemical-intensive process
because these elements are very chemically similar to one another. For more information, see Cindy Hurst,
China’s Rare Erath Elements Industry: What Can the West Learn? (Washington, DC: Institute for the Analysis of
Global Security, March 2010), 18–19, http://americanresources.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/rareearth.pdf.
10 “Global and China Cobalt Industry Report, 2018-2023,” PR Newswire, March 26, 2019, https://www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/global-and-china-cobalt-industry-report-2018-2023-300818715.html.
11 Ladislaw et al., Industrial Policy, Trade, and Clean Energy Supply Chains, 11.
12 “Global and China Cobalt Industry Report, 2018-2023,” PR Newswire.
13 Ladislaw et al., Industrial Policy, Trade, and Clean Energy Supply Chains, 10.
14 Ibid., 10.
15 Tom Daly, “China becomes world’s biggest importer of rare earths: analysts,” Reuters, March 13, 2019, https://
www.reuters.com/article/us-china-rareearths/china-becomes-worlds-biggest-importer-of-rare-earths-
analysts-idUSKBN1QU1RO.
27 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

16 Yujia He, “Re-Control the Market for Strategic Power: China’s Reregulation of its Rare Earth Industry,”
(Ph.D. dissertation, Georgia Institute of Technology, 2016), 175, https://smartech.gatech.edu/bitstream/
handle/1853/58561/HE-DISSERTATION-2016.pdf.
17 Ibid., 179
18 Ibid., 176.
19 Marc Humphries, Critical Minerals and U.S. Public Policy, CRS Report No. R45810 (Washington, DC:
Congressional Research Service, June 28, 2019), 40, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45810/2.
20 Yuzhou Shen, Ruthann Moomy, and Roderic G. Eggert, “China’s public policies toward rare earths, 1975–
2018,” Miner Econ 33 (2020), 133, doi:10.1007/s13563-019-00214-2.
21 “United States Wins Victory in Rare Earths Dispute with China: WTO Report Finds China’s Export Restraints
Breach WTO Rules,” Office of U.S. Trade Representative, Press release, March 26, 2014, https://ustr.gov/about-
us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2014/March/US-wins-victory-in-rare-earths-dispute-with-China.
22 Max J. Zenglein and Anna Holzmann, Evolving Made in China 2025 (Berlin: MERICS, July 2, 2019), https://
merics.org/en/report/evolving-made-china-2025.
23 Pan Aihua, “What Made-in-China 2025 means for petrochemicals and chemicals,” Canadian Process
Equipment & Control News, October 24, 2018, https://www.cpecn.com/features/what-made-in-china-2025-
means-for-petrochemicals-and-chemicals/.
24 CK Tan and Iori Kawate, “China aims to reach ‘new level’ of prosperity by 2035,” Nikkei Asia, October 29, 2020,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Politics/China-aims-to-reach-new-level-of-prosperity-by-2035.
25 Shen, Moomy, and Eggert , “China’s public policies toward rare earths,” 138.
26 Ibid.
27 Ibid., 142.
28 Xie Jun and Li Xuanmin, “Export control law to affect rare earths, UAVs,” Global Times, November 30, 2020,
https://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1208529.shtml.
29 Liu Zhihua and Liu Yukun, “China to step up protection of rare earth resources,” China Daily, January 16, 2021,
https://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202101/16/WS60023d3aa31024ad0baa3039.html.
30 Ibid.
31 Vaibhav Gupta, Tirtha Biswas, and Karthik Ganesan, Critical Non-Fuel Mineral Resources for India’s
Manufacturing Sector: A Vision for 2030 (New Delhi: Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW) and
the National Science and Technology Management Information System Division of the Department of Science
and Technology of India, 2016), https://dst.gov.in/sites/default/files/CEEW_0.pdf.
32 Julia Pyper, “How India’s Renewable Energy Sector Survived and Thrived in a Turbulent 2020,” Greentech
Media, January 6, 2021, https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/india-solar-energy-transition-
pandemic-2020; and “India turns to electric vehicles to beat pollution,” BBC News, July 23, 2019, https://www.
bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-48961525.
33 Karl Decena, “Australia signs MOU to supply critical minerals to India,” S&P Global, June 4, 2020, https://www.
spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-headlines/australia-signs-mou-to-supply-
28 | Jane Nakano

critical-minerals-to-india-58922619.
34 Government of Australia, Australia’s Critical Minerals Strategy (Canberra: Australian Department of Industry,
Science, Energy and Resources, 2019), https://www.industry.gov.au/data-and-publications/australias-critical-
minerals-strategy/national-actions-on-critical-minerals.
35 Ibid.
36 The United States has a stockpile of materials, the National Defense Stockpile (NDS), that is managed by the
director of the Defense Logistics Agency and is set up to meet the DOD’s mission requirements—not to supply
the clean energy industry. The current NDS contains 37 materials (valued at $1.152 billion) that are mostly
processed metals or other downstream products, including rare-earth and lithium-ion precursors. (For more
information, see Humphries, Critical Minerals and U.S. Public Policy, 7.)
37 The European Commission deliberated on the efficacy of national stockpiling of critical minerals in 2012
but found no support for it. For more information, see European Commission, On the Implementation of the
Raw Materials Initiative (Brussels: European Commission, June 24, 2013), 3–4, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2013:0442:FIN:EN:PDF.
38 Brandon S. Tracy, An Overview of Rare Earth Elements and Related Issues for Congress, CRS Report No. R46618
(Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, November 24, 2020), 2, https://www.everycrsreport.com/
files/2020-11-24_R46618_6639173333b5877128b3af8449e1c1d88a16f327.pdf.
39 Jeffery A. Green, “The collapse of American rare earth mining—and lessons learned,” Defense News, November
12, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/opinion/commentary/2019/11/12/the-collapse-of-american-rare-
earth-mining-and-lessons-learned/.
40 Humphries, Critical Minerals and U.S. Public Policy, 2.
41 Ibid., 3.
42 “Critical Materials Rare Earths Supply Chain: A Situational White Paper,” U.S. Department of Energy (U.S.
DOE), April 2020, 7, https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/04/f73/Critical%20Materials%20
Supply%20Chain%20White%20Paper%20April%202020.pdf.
43 Tracy, An Overview of Rare Earth Elements.
44 “DOD Announces Rare Earth Element Awards to Strengthen Domestic Industrial Base,” U.S. Department
of Defense, Press release, November 17, 2020, https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/
Article/2418542/dod-announces-rare-earth-element-awards-to-strengthen-domestic-industrial-base/; and
“DOD Announces Rare Earth Element Award to Strengthen Domestic Industrial Base,” U.S. Department
of Defense, Press release, February 1, 2021, https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/
Article/2488672/dod-announces-rare-earth-element-award-to-strengthen-domestic-industrial-base/.
45 “Critical Materials Rare Earths Supply Chain,” U.S. DOE, 7–8.
46 Notably, Panasonic announced in January 2021 its plan to develop batteries for Tesla that are free of cobalt
over the next few years. Mitsuru Obe, “Cheaper Tesla? Panasonic to develop cobalt-free battery,” Nikkei Asia,
January 12, 2021, https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/CES-2021/Cheaper-Tesla-Panasonic-to-develop-cobalt-
free-battery.
47 David R Baker, “Why Batteries Are the Key to Biden’s Green Dreams,” Bloomberg Green, January 16, 2021,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-01-16/why-batteries-are-the-key-to-biden-s-green-dreams-
quicktake?sref=B2BBHw9t.
29 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

48 U.S. DOE, Critical Materials Strategy (Washington, DC: December 2011), 120, https://www.energy.gov/sites/
prod/files/DOE_CMS2011_FINAL_Full.pdf.
49 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Advanced Technologies: Strengthened Federal Approach Needed to Help
Identify and Mitigate Supply Risks for Critical Raw Materials (Washington, DC: September 2016), 2, https://www.
gao.gov/assets/680/679577.pdf.
50 U.S. DOE, Critical Materials Strategy.
51 U.S. DOE, Critical Materials Technology Assessments, Quadrennial Technology Review 2015 (Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Energy, 2015), https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2015/12/f27/QTR2015-6F-Critical-
Materials.pdf.
52 U.S. Department of Commerce, A Federal Strategy to Ensure Secure and Reliable Supplies of Critical Minerals
(Washington, DC: June 2019).
53 Ibid., 27.
54 “Energy Resource Governance Initiative,” U.S. Department of State Bureau of Energy Resources, Fact sheet,
2019, https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Energy-Resource-Governance-Initiative-ERGI-
Fact-Sheet.pdf.
55 “Nine countries join U.S. strategic minerals initiative,” Reuters, September 26, 2019, https://www.reuters.
com/article/usa-minerals-china-idUSL2N26G229.
56 U.S. Department of Commerce, A Federal Strategy to Ensure Secure and Reliable Supplies of Critical Minerals, 6.
57 “Critical Materials Rare Earths Supply Chain,” U.S. DOE, 2.
58 U.S. Department of Commerce, Federal Strategy to Ensure Secure and Reliable Supplies of Critical Minerals, 25.
59 “Executive Order 13953: Addressing the Threat to the Domestic Supply Chain from Reliance on Critical
Minerals from Foreign Adversaries and Supporting the Domestic Mining and Processing Industries,” White
House, September 2020, https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/10/05/2020-22064/addressing-
the-threat-to-the-domestic-supply-chain-from-reliance-on-critical-minerals-from-foreign.
60 U.S. DOE, Critical Minerals and Materials—U.S. Department of Energy’s Strategy to Support Domestic Critical mineral
and Material Supply Chain (FY2021-FY2031) (Washington, DC: January 2021), https://www.energy.gov/sites/
prod/files/2021/01/f82/DOE%20Critical%20Minerals%20and%20Materials%20Strategy_0.pdf.
61 Ibid., 3.
62 Ibid., 4.
63 “Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains,” White House, February 24, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/02/24/executive-order-on-americas-supply-chains/; White
House, “America’s Supply Chains,” Federal Register, March 3, 2021, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/03/01/2021-04280/americas-supply-chains.
64 “Fact Sheet: Securing America’s Critical Supply Chains,” White House, February 24, 2021, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/02/24/fact-sheet-securing-americas-critical-supply-
chains/.
30 | Jane Nakano

65 “The Biden Plan to Rebuild U.S. Supply Chains and Ensure the U.S. Does Not Face Future Shortages of Critical
Equipment,” Biden for President, https://joebiden.com/supplychains/.
66 “The Executive Order on Ensuring the Future is Made in all of America by All of America’s Workers,” White
House, January 25, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/01/25/
executive-order-on-ensuring-the-future-is-made-in-all-of-america-by-all-of-americas-workers/.
67 European Commission, Study on the EU’s list of Critical Raw Materials – Final Report (Brussels: European
Commission, 2020), 7, https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/raw-materials/specific-interest/critical_en.
68 Ibid., 14.
69 Ibid.
70 European Commission, Critical Materials for Strategic Technologies and Sectors in the EU - A Foresight Study
(Brussels: European Commission, 2020), https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/42881.
71 Ibid.
72 Ibid.
73 European Commission, The raw materials initiative — meeting our critical needs for growth and jobs in
Europe (Brussels: European Commission, April 11, 2008), 5, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:52008DC0699.
74 Ibid., 9
75 Ibid., 3.
76 European Commission, Critical Raw Materials Resilience: Charting a Path towards greater Security and
Sustainability (Brussels: European Commission, September 3, 2020), https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0474.
77 Ibid., 5.
78 “About Us,” European Raw Materials Alliance, https://erma.eu/about-us/.
79 European Commission, The European Green Deal (Brussels: EuropeanCommission,December 11, 2019), https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1596443911913&uri=CELEX:52019DC0640#document2.
80 “Green Deal: Sustainable batteries for a circular climate neutral economy,” European Commission, Press
release, December 10, 2020, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_2312.
81 Frédéric Simon, “Europe faces up to China’s supremacy on raw materials,” Euractiv, October 5, 2020, https://
www.euractiv.com/section/circular-economy/news/europe-faces-up-to-chinas-supremacy-on-raw-materials/.
82 European Commission, A New Industrial Strategy for Europe (Brussels: European Commission, March 10, 2020),
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0102.
83 Daniel Fiott, Strategic autonomy: towards ‘European sovereignty’ in defense? (Paris: European Union Institute
for Security Studies, November 2018), https://www.iss.europa.eu/sites/default/files/EUISSFiles/Brief%20
12__Strategic%20Autonomy.pdf.
84 European Commission, A New Industrial Strategy for Europe, 13.
31 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

85 Frédéric Simon, “Raw materials: the missing link in Europe’s drive for batteries,” Euractiv, November 9, 2020,
https://www.euractiv.com/section/energy-environment/news/raw-materials-the-missing-link-in-europes-
drive-for-batteries/.
86 Sam Morgan, “EU could ban dirty battery imports, says Commission VP,” Euractiv, December 9, 2019, https://
www.euractiv.com/section/batteries/news/eu-could-ban-dirty-battery-imports-says-sefcovic/.
87 European Commission, Critical Raw Materials Resilience, 1.
88 “Europe’s Moment: Repair and Prepare for the Next Generation,” European Commission, Press Release, May
27, 2020, 12–13, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2020:456:FIN.
89 Ibid.
90 European Commission, Critical Raw Materials Resilience, 8.
91 “Europe’s Moment,” European Commission, 13.
92 National Institute for Environmental Studies, “Technologies for Rare Metal Recycling [Author’s translation],”
（レアメタル リサイクル技術 in the original language）(2016), https://tenbou.nies.go.jp/science/
description/detail.php?id=62.
93 Australian Trade and Investment Commission, Critical Minerals Supply Chain in the United States
(Australian Trade and Investment Commission, September 2019), 5, https://www.austrade.gov.au/
ArticleDocuments/1358/Critical-minerals-US-report.pdf.aspx.
94 He, “Re-Control the Market for Strategic Power,” 128.
95 “Critical Materials Rare Earths Supply Chain,” U.S. DOE, 9.
96 Satoshi Kawamura and Haruto Takeda, “Natural Resource and Energy Policies,” Summary of Trade and Industrial
Policies, 1980-2000, No.10 [Author’s translation] (通商産業政策 (1980~2000年) の概要 (10) 資源エネルギー
政策 in the original language), RIETI Policy Discussion Paper Series 14-P-017, Research Institute of Economy,
Trade and Industry (August 2014): 11, https://www.rieti.go.jp/jp/publications/pdp/14p017.pdf.
97 Ibid.
98 Author’s translation. The original is 今後のレアメタルの安定供給対策について.
99 Yozo Baba, “An Overview of the Current Situation of the Metals and Minerals Market,” Journal of the Surface
Science Society of Japan 29, no. 10 (2008), 584, https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/jsssj/29/10/29_10_578/_
pdf/-char/ja.
100 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Guidelines for Securing Natural Resources [Author’s translation] (資源確保指針の
策定について in the original language) (Tokyo: Government of Japan, 2008), https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/
gaiko/energy/shishin.html.
101 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Strategies for Securing Rare Metals [Author’s translation] (レアメタ
ル確保戦略 in the original language) (Tokyo: Government of Japan, July 28, 2009), http://www.gichokai.gr.jp/
archive/member/chosabu/zengishiryo/21nen/038/038-1.pdf.
102 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, A Broad Picture of Measures to Secure Rare Metals [Author’s
translation] (レアメタル等の確保に向けた取組の全体像 in the original language) (Tokyo: Government of
Japan, December 2011), 3, https://www.meti.go.jp/shingikai/sankoshin/sangyo_gijutsu/haikibutsu_recycle/
32 | Jane Nakano

pdf/018_03_00.pdf.
103 Yujia He, “Regulation of China’s rare earth production and export,” International Journal of Emerging Markets
(April 2014), 249, doi:10.1108/IJoEM-09-2012-0117.
104 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Comprehensive Measures Regarding Rare Earths [Author’s translation]
(レアアース総合対策 in the original language) (Tokyo: Government of Japan, December 13, 2010), 5, https://
www.jraia.or.jp/member/oshirase/mite-nedo201012_1.pdf.
105 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Critical Non-China Supply Chain in the Age of Green Innovation
(Tokyo: Government of Japan, September 1, 2020), 14.
106 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Strategies to Secure Natural Resources [Author’s translation] (資源
確保戦略 in the original language) (Tokyo: Government of Japan, 2012), 6, http://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/singi/
package/dai15/sankou01.pdf.
107 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Critical non-China Supply Chain in the Age of Green Innovation, 13.
108 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, The Strategic Energy Plan (Tokyo: Government of Japan, July 2018),
37, https://www.enecho.meti.go.jp/en/category/others/basic_plan/5th/pdf/strategic_energy_plan.pdf.
109 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Critical non-China Supply Chain in the Age of Green Innovation, 13.
110 Ibid., 23.
111 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, New International Resource Strategy (Tokyo: Government of Japan,
March 2020), 9, https://www.meti.go.jp/press/2019/03/20200330009/20200330009-1.pdf.
112 Ibid., 11.
113 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Critical Non-China Supply Chain in the Age of Green Innovation, 22.
114 Rieko Suda, “Japan to strengthen control over rare metal reserves,” Argus Media, July 3, 2020, https://www.
argusmedia.com/en/news/2120125-japan-to-strengthen-control-over-rare-metal-reserves; and Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry, New International Resource Strategy, 10.
115 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Issues for Consideration in Formulating A New International Resource
Strategy [Author’s translation] (新・国際資源戦略の策定に向けた論点 in the original language) (Tokyo:
Government of Japan, October 4, 2019), 47, https://www.meti.go.jp/shingikai/enecho/shigen_nenryo/sekiyu_
gas/pdf/010_03_00.pdf.
116 Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, A Summary of Supplementary Budget for Fiscal Year 2020 [Author’s
translation] (令和２年度補正予算 in the original language) (Tokyo: Government of Japan, April 2020),
5, https://www.meti.go.jp/main/yosan/yosan_fy2020/hosei/pdf/hosei_yosan_gaiyo.pdf; and Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry, A Summary of Projects Related to the Third Supplementary Budget for Fiscal
Year 2020 [Author’s translation] (令和２年度第３次補正予算の事業概要 in the original language) (Tokyo:
Government of Japan, January 2021), 26–27. https://www.meti.go.jp/main/yosan/yosan_fy2020/hosei/pdf/
hosei3_yosan_pr.pdf.
33 | The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains

COVER PHOTO IAN BARLOW
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 | www.csis.org