Sal de Vida: A risky lithium mining
project in Argentina
This briefing was prepared by Asamblea Pueblos Catamarqueños en Resistencia y Autodeterminación (PUCARA), Fundación
Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (FARN), Fundación Yuchan, and the Bank Information Center (BIC).
Please note: This is a living document, we are currently doing more research and field work to understand the (lack of)
stakeholder engagement and information disclosure and the environmental and social risks and impacts of the project.
Introduction and after-tax profit of $337 million USD for fiscal year end
6/30/22. It is listed on the Australian Securities Exchange
and the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Sal de Vida (SDV) is a lithium mining project located in
the Salar del Hombre Muerto, Province of Catamarca,
The IFC is considering a $200 million USD loan to the
Argentina. If the project is approved, it would extract
Sal de Vida project (45668). The company has already
600,000 tons of lithium carbonate (LCE) over the next
issued two engineering, procurement, and construction
fourty years for export to Europe and the United States.
management contracts: a) one for the evaporation ponds
The project plans to extract large amounts of brine from
and the project infrastructure; and b) for the construction
the Salar del Hombre Muerto aquifer through eight
of the lithium carbonate plant. According to the IFC, the
pumping wells, which is then sent to large evaporation
proposed investment will comprise a direct loan of $100
pools. Using minimal processing, the operation will
million USD and mobilization from commercial banks of
transform the mineral extracted into lithium carbonate.
up to $100 million USD. This investment will be used to
produce 15,000 tons of LCE per year. The IFC’s investment
Salar del Hombre Muerto is a high-altitude wetland
will allow Sal de Vida to develop its production, deepening
located more than 4,000 meters above sea level in the
the negative environmental and social impacts of lithium
north of the Province of Catamarca, an arid region
mining in the Salar del Hombre Muerto and impact
characterized by lack of natural water resources. It
communities living in the territory.
is inhabited by different settlements, hamlets, and
Indigenous communities.
Although it is a Category A project, many of the
environmental and social impacts and risks are not
The mining operation was originally owned by Galaxy
being properly analyzed and addressed, thus, the IFC
Resources Ltd. However, on August 25, 2021, the company
is underestimating several potential risks in project
merged with Orocobre Ltd and created Allkem Ltd. Allkem
appraisal.
is a lithium chemicals company, which has operations in
Argentina and Australia and lithium hydroxide conversion
facilities in Japan. Allkem owns 100% of the operation
and has partnerships with Toyota Tsusho Corporation,
the Province of Jujuy, and the Province of Catamarca,
Argentina. The company has over $3 billion USD in assets

Environmental concerns influence, the company and the IFC have failed to
accurately identify and value many environmental
and social impacts of the project. For example, the
1. Concerns regarding the technical determination of
EIA underestimates the impact on hydrological and
the area of direct and indirect influence. The project’s
hydrogeological processes, biodiversity, and the location
Environmental and Impact Assessment (EIA) designates
of critical habitats, including grasslands and riparian
the operational area as the only area of direct influence
ecosystems. In short, the project has significantly
of the project. It is where the camp, the processing plant,
more environmental impacts on the larger region than
the extraction wells, and the evaporation pools are
acknowledged in the EIA.
located, covering 54 km2. The external area of the project
was designated as the indirect influence area (Fig. 1.a,
2. Cumulative impacts. Cumulative impacts are those
page 10); however, the EIA provides no justification or
that result from the successive, incremental, and/or
a technical explanation for this delimitation. Taking into
combined effects of an activity or project when added
consideration the hydrological and hydrogeological
to the effects of other existing or planned ventures.1
implications of the scale of brine and freshwater
In the Salar del Hombre Muerto, eight lithium brine
extraction (which are explained in the water pressure
mining projects have been registered in different mining
point), the area of direct influence is actually equal to or
stages (Fig. 4). All existing mines are located in the same
greater than the area of indirect influence indicated in
endorheic basin, using the same brine resource and
the EIA (544 km2). The indirect area of influence should
fresh water for mineral processing. Sal de Vida is one of
cover the entire basin of the Salar del Hombre Muerto,
these eight projects.
including the Los Patos river, 4316 km2(Fig. 1. b, page 10).
By underestimating the area of direct and indirect
1 IFC 2013; Minerals Council of Australia 2015.
(a) (b)
Fig. 1 Area of direct environmental influence and area of indirect environmental influence according to the
Environmental Impact Assessment of Sal de Vida Project (a); and according to the national and international
criteria and standards (b).
APRIL 2023 2

Two of the other projects (Alpha Lithium’s Tolillar concentrated lithium brine. As mentioned above,
expansion and Galan Lithium’s Hombre Muerto Oeste extraction was approved for two companies (Minera
project) are in the prospecting stage (pre-exploration) del Altiplano, Galaxy Lithium Argentina) for a total of
and do not require an EIA. Of the remaining projects, 3,416,000 m3 /yr. This represents 15.6 times the volume
we reviewed five EIAs for projects under consideration: of water consumed for domestic use in the town of
two for exploration stage (Virgen del Valle, and Candelas Antofagasta de la Sierra, located in an adjacent basin.
projects) and three for exploitation stage (Fénix, Sal
3. Evaporitic extractive technology and water
de Vida, and Sal de Oro projects). Although the most
pressure. The endorheic catchments in the high and arid
recent projects refer to the existence of projects in
Andean plateau have a negative hydrological balance
the basin to justify the high productivity and quality of
because the mean annual evaporation exceeds that of
the lithium reserves, none of the revised EIAs identify
precipitation, and rates of groundwater discharge often
cumulative impacts from the use of the same brine and
exceed modern recharge.2 In these arid Andean wetlands,
water resource, as required by the national guidelines
lithium in brine is extracted from saline deposits through
developed by the Secretaria de Ambiente de la Nación
slow and inefficient methods. Extraction requires large
in 2019 and the provincial mining authority (COFEMIN
investment and use of natural resources in relation to
2019).
the final product.3 However, this is the method adopted
Cumulative impacts have not been considered in by the Sal de Vida project, which will extract the brine
the Mitigation Measures or in the Management and from the Salar del Hombre Muerto salt flat, evaporating
Contingency Plans in any of the EIAs of the eight mining it in open pools where the different salts sequentially
projects in the region. The most notable example of precipitate, and recovering the lithium carbonate from
the absence of a Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA)
2 For example, Van Beek et al. 2011; Gleeson et al. 2012.
is the extraction of fresh water from the Río Los Patos,
which is a designated stewardship zone, for processing 3 Flexer et al. 2018; Sticco 2018.
APRIL 2023 3

the concentrated brine in a treatment plant at the end of The independent study carried out by the Consejo
the process (which also will require copious volumes of Federal de Inversiones on December 2021, elaborated a
fresh water during the next 40 years). conceptual hydrogeological model, in which the authors
identified a dynamic interaction between the surface and
Because of the scale, lithium brine mining should be
groundwater of Los Patos River and its tributaries.11 In the
framed as large-scale or mega-mining in relation to
numerical model, the authors simulate two freshwater
water consumption.4 According to the values provided
extraction scenarios that include Sal de Vida and other
by the Sal de Vida project, the estimated volume of
mining projects. In relation to the freshwater wells
water used in the mining project is estimated at 450
of Sal de Vida, the authors show maximum projected
m3/tn of Li2CO3 produced. Of this total, approximately
declines for scenario one between 0.4 m to 1.2 m, while
90% will be associated with brine evaporation, while the
for scenario two, they show depressions between 1.6 m
remaining 10% will be related to involved in freshwater
to 3 m. However, the simulation does not analyze the
consumption. These estimated values are similar to the
reduction in superficial flow, and even less, the impacts
water footprint measured at the Olaroz project in the
on critical riparian habitats (hydrophilous grasslands,
province of Jujuy, also owned by Allkem.5
meadows, and wetlands). It should be noted that this
independent study considers the cumulative effects of
The sustained extraction of groundwater brines and
the simulated extraction of six mining projects within
surface waters over decades is likely to affect these
the same watershed. However, the Sal de Vida EIA does
wetlands’ hydrological balance, salinity, and unique
not acknowledge the existence of other projects in the
biodiversity.6 In this regard, a study in the Salar de Atacama,
identification and assessment of cumulative impacts (see
Chile, has found that the fast expansion of lithium mining
cumulative impacts section).
operations have a strong correlation with the ongoing
environmental degradation in the area.7 Impacts of
Additionally, the complete and irreversible drying of the
lithium mining water extraction are difficult to ascertain
Trapiche River floodplain has already occurred as a result
in the short term due to: a) historical climate patterns; b)
of freshwater extraction by the Fénix project (Livent Inc.)
variable climate conditions; c) the occurrence of extreme
in the Salar del Hombre Muerto basin. The viability of the
climatic events;8 and d) times of response of natural
Sal de Vida mining project is based on the externalization
environmental variables to complex hydrogeological
of water resource costs.
processes. These hydrogeological processes involve the
distribution and timing of groundwater recharge, long
residence times (>100 years), deep water tables (>100
Social concerns
m), and groundwater flow paths -which often cross
topographic boundaries before emerging at basin floors.
4. Social Conflict and Criminalization. Local Indigenous
Moreover, there is often insufficient data, which is an
communities around the project have been victims of
additional difficulty in properly ascertaining the impacts
criminalization as a direct consequence of their actions
of water extraction.9
in defending their rights, territory, access to water, and
cultural heritage. The Salar del Hombre Muerto and
The EIA for the Sal de Vida project lacks accurate and
surrounding areas is a territory in constant conflict. For
appropriate hydrogeological information for the scale of
example, on October 31, 2019, several members of a local
the project. Regarding the impact of freshwater extraction
family, the Morales, were arrested in their own home. The
from Los Patos River for several mining projects,
Antofagasta police officers implemented an abusive and
including Sal de Vida, the baseline information used
illegal use of force to arrest them before transferring the
to prepare the water balance and the hydrogeological
Morales family to the town of Belén. Mining companies
models is insufficient.10 There are no records in the river
struck an interest in using the ancestral land of the
catchments, and the hydrological data of Los Patos
Morales family as a way of passage for mining trucks
River and its main tributary were taken sporadically and
(commonly called “mining bypass”).
at different points or sections of the stream (a major
methodological mistake).
Also, on November 7, 2019, the residents of Antofagasta
4 Donadío, 2009.
peacefully demonstrated in the main square to express
5 Arias Alvarado et al. 2022.
6 Gajardo and Redón 2019. their opposition to the lithium mining projects in the
7 Liu et al. 2019. area. After this peaceful demonstration, a local leader
8 Bennet et al. 2016; Pabón-Caicedo 2020; de la Fuente et al. 2021, Alam and
received a police summons at his job, an example of the
Sepúlveda 2022.
9 Frau et al. 2021; Moran et al. 2019b. institutional violence and persecution those who oppose
10 For more information see the independent study carried out by Consejo
Federal de Inversiones (2021). Estudio hidrogeológico cuenca del río Los 11 Consejo Federal de Inversiones. (2021). Estudio hidrogeológico cuenca del
Patos-Salar del Hombre Muerto – 2da Etapa. Informe final. río Los Patos-Salar del Hombre Muerto – 2da Etapa. Informe final.
APRIL 2023 4

mining activity face. A few days later, members of the of a QR code system had limited participation from the
Atacameños del Altiplano Indigenous community (the community.
main community affected by Sal de Vida), were arrested
Secondly, it was only in that instance that Allkem,
on their community lands for supposed “threats.” Instead
together with the Ministry of Mining, provided (for the
of being notified and summoned (as national legislation
first time) the complete EIA - despite the EIA having been
and international agreements established), they were
requested by representatives of the Atacameños del
deprived of their freedom in violation of national and
Altiplano community several times. The population had
international regulations on Indigenous communities
only one month to read, analyze, share it with technicians,
(art. 75 inc. 17 of the National Constitution and art. 10 of
prepare their comments and questions, and participate
ILO Convention 169).
in the consultation. Due to the report’s length, language,
On December 19, 2019, yet another episode of and complexity, one month was not enough time to
institutional violence occurred. Mr. Román Guitian analyze the EIA and have informed participation in a
and his family (members of Atacameños del Altiplano consultation. The Atacameños del Altiplano felt they did
community), were persecuted within their community not have enough time and information to have a strong
territory (an area close to the mining company) by two and effective participation the day of the consultation.
police officers driving a private van that belongs to the
Finally, according to the Environmental Impact Report
mining company.
presented by Allkem, the area of direct social impact is
The repetition of these violent events shows that these the community of Antofagasta de la Sierra; while the
are not isolated cases. It is a contested territory, in which entire province of Catamarca is the area of indirect social
Atacameños del Altiplano and everyone who opposes impact. However, the company
the mining activity is subject to criminalization and legal
carried out a weak consultation process only in the town
persecution.
of Ciénaga Redonda, despite the area’s limited access to
Moreover, to speak about the company’s track record, project information and internet connectivity problems.
Allkem has not a good reputation regarding compliance Thus, the entire population identified by Allkem in the
with environmental regulations and safeguarding of area of social influence was not allowed to participate
rights of project affected communities. An investigation in the “consultation” carried out by the company. This
carried out by Fundación Ambiente y Recursos Naturales violated their right to access project documents and
identifies Orocobre company (Allkem) violated the right information to know about the risks, impacts, and
to participation and the free, prior, and informed consent benefits of the project to be prepared to effectively
of local indigenous communities, in its Olaroz project engage in the consultation process.
(a lithium mining project in Argentina, as Sal de Vida
Consequently, we highlight the seriousness of the absence
project).
of effective and meaningful participation of stakeholders
5. Lack of information and weak consultation process. and project affected communities throughout the Sal de
Since the beginning of Sal de Vida, there was a complete Vida project stages - from the proposal to the IFC Board’s
lack of access to information for local and project affected consideration.
communities. Due to the absence of information provided
6. Lack of consideration of sacred ancestral sites.
by the company, several requests for public information
The EIA presented by Allkem did not identify any sacred
were made to the provincial government, which were not
sites, but also doesn’t describe any dialogue with the
answered or only partially resolved.
Indigenous communities (Atacameños del Altiplano and
The lack of information disclosure about the Sal de Vida Atacameños del Andiofaco) regarding the identification,
project violates access to information rights. It is worth location, and registration of cultural and sacred sites.
noting that in October 2021, the company held informative
Despite the supposed absence of sacred sites according
talks and a supposed consultation in the town of Ciénaga
to the EIA, there are various sacred sites in the territory
Redonda. However, the consultation did not meet the
affected by the project. Two of the sites identified as
regulatory and culturally appropriate standards for
sacred by Indigenous communities are: “Punta de la
Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities. The notice
peña” and “Tumba del hombre muerto”.
of the consultations were distributed through QR codes,
which requires a cell phone to access and is inaccessible
Tumba del hombre muerto has a special cultural and
to most of the Antofagasta de la Sierra population, who
spiritual significance for the community due to ancestors
lack adequate cell phones and internet connectivity to
of the Guitian family resting there, an original family from
access information through a QR code. Thus, the use
the salt flat. This grave “Tumba del hombre muerto”,
APRIL 2023 5

gave the name to the salt flat “Salar del Hombre Muerto”. hydrogeological models within the current EIA is
insufficient. Also, the hydrological data collection
In the absence of identification and registration of
presents methodological mistakes. The water
ancestral cultural sites by the EIA, important areas are
pressure analysis should be strengthened to address
in danger of being partially or totally impacted and
the methodological mistakes and use proper and
damaged, as a result of the Sal de Vida project. Further,
sufficient data pertaining to the project’s scale.
this grave and spiritual site was threatened through the
• Develop a cumulative impact assessment and
construction of the mining road.
make it public by sharing it with provincial
7. Legal actions at the national level against the authorities and project affected communities:
company: Due to violations of rights previously The current EIA does not include the assessment
mentioned, the Indigenous community Atacameños del of cumulative impacts. Identifying cumulative
Altiplano, carried out administrative and judicial actions impacts is key to understanding the water pressure
at the national level to denounce the behavior of the in the Salar del Hombre Muerto where Sal de Vida
mining companies in the region and systematic violation is located, and IFC should consider this during
of their human rights. Currently, the Supreme Court project appraisal. Currently, eight lithium brine
of the province of Catamarca is processing judicial file mining projects are registered in the Salar del
No. 54/2022, which requests the urgent suspension of Hombre Muerto. All of them are located in the same
mining projects that request the extraction of water from endorheic basin, using the same brine resource
Los Patos river (Sal de Vida and others). The suspension and fresh water for processing the mineral. In
request is based on the lack of a corresponding, conversations with IFC management, they claimed
cumulative, and comprehensive EIA and disclosure of that they required the client to develop a rapid
these documents. Further, this request is made due to cumulative impact assessment. However, the
the violation of the rights of the Indigenous communities document is not public and has not been submitted
that ancestrally inhabited the Salar del Hombre Muerto to the relevant provincial authorities and project
(National Constitution, National Law 21.160, National Law affected communities.
25.657, Free Prior and Informed Consent regulated by ILO
2. Strengthen the consultation process and
Convention 169, the United Nations Declaration on the
engagement with Indigenous Peoples and local
Human Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and the American
communities
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples).
• The IFC should require the company to carry out a
consultation process not only open to Indigenous
Recommendations and non-Indigenous peoples, but also to inhabitants
of the social impact area identified by the EIA. Also,
Considering the points raised above, we recommend that the consultation process should be implemented
the IFC postpones the decision regarding the financing according to PS 1 and national standards.
of this project until the following actions are taken:
• The consultation process should be meaningful
and robust to guarantee the participants’ security
1. Strengthen the Environmental Impact Assessment
and avoid criminalization, and harassment of local
• Reassess the extent of the area of direct and leaders and/or members of local communities
indirect influence of the project: The IFC should who oppose or raise questions about the project.
require Allkem to review the current EIA and set Allkem and its subsidiary Galaxy Lithium SA.
a proper determination of the area of direct and must guarantee a safe environment to conduct
indirect influence. As referenced above, the current consultations that are based on good faith and are
EIA underestimates the area of direct and indirect culturally appropriate, particularly addressing the
influence, thus reducing the scope of the project’s concerns of those who oppose the project or have
environmental impacts and underestimating the raised concerns about it.
hydrological and hydrogeological effects and the
• IFC should supervise that the company is effectively
impacts on local biodiversity.
disclosing complete information about the project
• Strengthen the water pressure analysis: The risks, impacts, and benefits with project affected
lack of accurate and appropriate hydrogeological communities and stakeholders and that their views
information on the scale of the mining project in and perspectives are taken into account in the
the EIA underestimates the water pressure. The Environmental and Social Management Plan. The
baseline information about the water balance and company should share information about risks
APRIL 2023 6

and impacts in a timely and culturally appropriate
manner with project affected communities. It also
must be in a format that is accessible and that
facilitates understanding for communities to be
prepared to meaningfully participate and provide
their input in consultations.
• The information provided by the company must
be objective and account for the real impacts of
the project within the territory, including negative
impacts on cultural heritage and sacred sites, such
as the Indigenous gravesite, Tumba del Hombre
Muerto.
3. Develop a contextual risk Assessment
• Strengthen environmental and social appraisal and
supervision: The IFC should require the company to
conduct a contextual risk assessment that evaluates
external risks of the operating environment, such
as legacy issues, unresolved land disputes, the
role of private and public security forces, internal
social conflict, etc. All these risks must be factored
into decision-making and overall risk management,
including potential unresolved legacy issues.
APRIL 2023 7