Lithium extraction
in Argentina: a case
study on the social and
environmental impacts
Pía Marchegiani, Jasmin Höglund Hellgren and Leandro Gómez.
Credit: Calma Cine.

Executive summary
The global demand for lithium has grown significantly over recent years and is expected to grow
further due to its use in batteries for different products. Lithium is used in smaller electronic devices
such as mobile phones and laptops but also for larger batteries found in electric vehicles and mobility
vehicles. This growing demand has generated a series of policy responses in different countries in the
southern cone triangle (Argentina, Bolivia and Chile), which together hold around 80 per cent of the
world’s lithium salt brine reserves in their salt flats in the Puna area.
Although Argentina has been extracting lithium since 1997, for a long time there was only one
lithium-producing project in the country. In recent years, Argentina has experienced increased interest
in lithium mining activities. In 2016, it was the most dynamic lithium producing country in the world,
increasing production from 11 per cent to 16 per cent of the global market (Telam, 2017). There are
now around 46 different projects of lithium extraction at different stages. However, little consideration
has been given to the local impacts of lithium extraction considering human rights and the social and
environmental sustainability of the projects.
With this in mind, the current study seeks to contribute to an increased understanding of the potential
and actual impacts of lithium extraction on local communities, providing insights from local perspectives
to be considered in the wider discussion of sustainability, green technology and climate change. The
guiding questions of the investigation have centred on the different social and environmental dimensions
and human rights impacts that communities are experiencing as a result of lithium extraction. It has
focused on two of the most recent and advanced lithium projects in the Argentine Puna – Sales de Jujuy
and Minera Exar projects – which are both located in the Olaroz-Caucharí salt flat in Jujuy Province.
The investigation focused on two communities located close to the lithium projects: Huancar and Pastos
Chicos. A third community, Olaroz Chico, decided not to formally participate. However, exchanges with
some of its members allow us to include some impressions of their view too.
Argentine legislation recognises the right to indigenous communal property as well as the right
for indigenous people to use develop and control their lands, territories and resources. Moreover,
Argentina has ratified the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention 169 of the International Labour
Organization (ILO) and signed the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous people (UNDRIP). In
relation to extractive activities, this states that indigenous people have the right to determine how
to use their lands and resources. It also establishes that States should “obtain their free and informed
consent prior to the approval of any project affecting their lands or territories and other resources,
particularly in connection with the development, utilization or exploitation of mineral, water or other
resources” (UNDRIP, article 32, paragraph 2). However, although the notion of free, prior and informed
consent (FPIC) is enforceable according to Argentine constitutional norms, it has not been further
regulated in domestic law. This has led to a lack of implementation, which means that, in many cases,
the environmental impact assessment (EIA) –required for each mining project- is applied together with
a consultation phase that seeks to articulate FPIC rights.
In addition, the 2011 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Guidelines
for Multinational Enterprises recommend that multinational companies should undertake a series of
measures to ensure meaningful stakeholder engagement. For instance, General Policy 14 establishes
that companies should recognise existing local community authorities and provide communities with
opportunities to express their views and that these views should be taken into account when decisions
are made for projects that could affect them.
The authors identified several problems when analysing the engagement and relationship between
companies and communities, and when scrutinising the FPIC process from a rights-based approach.
02 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Community members described the engagement process and relationship with companies wanting to
extract lithium as more of a one-sided communication rather than a two-way process in which both
sides could freely express their opinions to reach mutual understanding. The processes described did
not seem to have involved communities or asked how they would like to design engagement activities
or receive information about proposed projects and their impacts. For instance, 85 per cent of the
interviewees said they were not consulted about how they wanted to receive information provided by
the companies.
This study also shows that communities were not properly informed about company activities. To
make sure local communities are informed, companies are obliged to provide information in a suitable
timeframe and in a way that community members can understand. However, due to the length and
technical nature of the materials, community members found it difficult to understand the information
provided by the mining companies. This illustrates how companies retained complete control over
what information was shared with communities. For instance, community members’ testimonies show
they found it difficult to understand companies reports and presentations from representatives, whose
explanations on environmental impacts were too brief. Also, it seems that companies did not fully
disclose all the relevant information about foreseeable risk factors and their potential environmental
impacts. This raises concerns about whether companies have acted in good faith.
Community members highlighted the significant impact of lithium mining projects on water resources
and the lack of information on this matter, both from the companies and the State. They expressed
environmental concerns in line with the experts’ opinion on the matter.
In addition, the provincial government did not appear to have gathered any baseline information to
help understand the environmental impacts of lithium extraction in the area. This adversely affects its
capacity to evaluate the EIA of the mining companies and to monitor its activities, further illustrating
how companies have control over what information is available to communities and what is submitted
in the EIA procedure.
The State has a responsibility for implementing the FPIC process to guarantee participation rights –a
responsibility that cannot be transferred or delegated to a third party. However, this study highlighted
the absence of State representatives throughout the whole engagement process. This has allowed
companies to negotiate with communities in an asymmetrical power dynamic: terms and conditions
to achieve their consent and social legitimacy were exchanged without any supervision by the State.
This absence of State and lack of information both serve to cast doubt over how much the State knows
about the companies’ compliance with FPIC requirements and their social and environmental impacts.
In the light of these findings, the study presents several recommendations for the State and the private
sector to make sure companies are honouring their obligations towards communities when they are
producing lithium.
Regarding the environmental impact assessment, the study recommends that the State should:
1. Adapt the EIA to national and international standards of citizen participation and FPIC rights.
2. Improve the requirements for baseline studies, providing a guide for the environmental impact study.
3. Realise watershed studies including the whole water basin to address the impacts of each project
in the whole water basin system, including cumulative impacts.
03 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Regarding the implementation of FPIC rights, the study recommends that the State should:
4. Inform local communities about their rights.
5. Provide legal and professional assistance to communities to facilitate their understanding and
exercising of rights.
6. Ensure State participation throughout the complete FPIC process and integrate impartial parties.
7. Devise capacity building activities for public employees on FPIC rights and process.
8. Provide redress mechanisms for the lack of FPIC implementation.
In addition, the research presents the following recommendations for the corporate sector:
9. Demand that the State should fulfill existing legal standards.
10. Act with transparency and disclose all relevant information in the proper timescale and following
due process, including corporate structure and supply chain, income, investment and expected returns
and risks to communities and the environment.
11. Uphold and respect international labour, environmental and human rights standards, including
the Argentine legislation, OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, UN Guiding Principles for
Business and Human Rights, the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention 169 of the International
Labour Organization and the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous people (UNDRIP).
12. Inform and call for other companies in the supply chain to comply with ESG standards.
04 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Executive summary 02
1. Introduction 06
2. Argentina and global lithium production 07
3. The mining model in Argentina: trends since the 1990s 10
3.1. Is it different with lithium? Attempts to industrialise 11
4. Decision-making on natural resources in a Federal State 13
4.1. Environmental legal framework 13
4.2. Consultation and Free, Prior and Informed 15
Consent (FPIC) rights
5. The case of Olaroz-Caucharí salt flat 17
5.1. The companies 19
5.1.1. Sales de Jujuy 19
5.1.2. Minera Exar 21
5.2. State representatives 22
5.3. The Atacama communities: social and political organisation 23
5.3.1. Huancar 24
5.3.2. Pastos Chicos 24
6. Company interaction with mining-affected communities 24
6.1. Establishment of the engagement process 25
6.2. Information and timely access 27
6.3. Results of the exchange: agreements and expectations 29
6.3.1. Perceptions and understanding regarding power asymmetry 29
6.3.2. Perceptions and understanding regarding the company’s 30
good faith
6.3.3. Possibilities of renegotiation 30
6.4. The role of the State 31
6.5. Environmental concerns 32
6.5.1. Community perception of risks and ambivalence 32
6.5.2. Environmental concerns 35
7. Main problems with the FPIC process 38
8. Closing remarks 39
9. Recommendations 40
10. Annexes 42
10.1. Annex I: Lithium mining projects in Argentina 42
10.2. Annex II: List of interviewees 46
11. Bibliography 47

1. Introduction1
The positioning of lithium as a key supply for batteries of electronic devices, electric vehicles and
energy storage has put this mineral at the centre of the electronic and energy debate. Thus, its demand
has been growing significantly, which should be understood in light of the technical development
in the production of larger li-ion batteries used in vehicles, giving the mineral a significant role in
climate change debates related to the international community’s need to shift to a post-carbon society.
Specifically, in view of the global need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the anticipated future
demand for electric-powered vehicles to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels.
In recent years, salt flats have become the focus of world attention after it was discovered that
lithium could be found in its brine waters. Salt flats are found in very arid regions with limited annual
precipitation. Consequently, the countries that have reserves of this mineral have seen an increasing
amount of interest in lithium extraction from multinational mining companies, battery producers and
electric car producers.
Argentina has a central role to play in this scenario, since it is part of an area known as the “lithium
triangle” – along with Chile and Bolivia. The three countries together account for around 80 per cent
of the world’s lithium salt brine reserves. Argentina is the third biggest global producer of lithium after
Australia and Chile (Landini y Marcheta, 2018).
Argentine government officials have welcomed the lithium boom, regarding it as an opportunity to
increase investment and employment in the country. However, the environmental and social impacts
of lithium extraction for local communities have not been taken into account as the number of projects
has multiplied.
The purpose of this study is to contribute to an increased understanding about the actual and potential
impacts of lithium extraction at a community level in Argentina. The expectation is to provide insights
from local perspectives that can be considered in the larger discussion about sustainability, green
technology and climate change. The findings will be relevant to government bodies and authorities,
mining companies and companies indirectly involved (those that use lithium in their products) as well
as experts in this field.
This research aims to investigate the local impacts of the two most recent and advanced lithium projects
in the Argentine Puna – Sales de Jujuy and Minera Exar, which are both located in the Olaroz-Caucharí
salt flat in the province of Jujuy. The study investigates local impacts by analysing the dynamics of
interactions and the actors involved, while examining the social, economic and environmental aspects
from a community perspective. The communities participating here are the 10 Atacama communities
that live near the salt flat. However, special attention will be paid to two communities living close to
the projects operating in Sales de Jujuy and Minera Exar: Huancar and Pastos Chicos.
Two research techniques were applied: 1) desk research based on gathering of primary and secondary
data through a literature study; and 2) fieldwork research based on interviews with community
members, a government representative and external actors (described below).
Two visits to the field were carried out, in which 45 interviews with community members were conducted.
The selection of interviewees in each of the communities first aimed to include community leaders.
Thereafter interviewees from various sub-groups were conducted (women, elderly, young, teachers,
1. The authors would like to thank Olwenn Fruchart, Sarah Bass, Franco Aguilar and Maximiliano Palazzo for their collabo-
ration in this study and to colleagues at the Centre for Research on Multinational Corporations – SOMO (Esther de Haan,
Martje Theuws and Alejandro González) for their support in this endeavour.
06 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

medical staff etc.). It is important to note that the sample of interviewees does not aim to provide a
statistical representation of the community. Instead the purpose was to include different views,
perspectives and opinions of the situation.
The interviews were semi-structured but all covered the social, economic and environmental dimensions
related to lithium extraction. Due to ethical and safety considerations, all of the community interviewees
will remain anonymous. Information was also provided by external actors: a school director, a teacher,
nurses and a hydrogeologist. Company representatives were contacted but no answer was received.
The current report is structured as follows: first, it provides background information on the political, legal
and institutional context; second, a case study is presented integrating the geographical references as
well as the main actors from the company and community; third, an analysis from different dimensions
of the interaction process together with the main concerns from a local perspective is provided; and last
but not least, a final discussion of the main findings and recommendations for the State and companies
involved concludes the paper.
2. Argentina and global lithium production
Argentina has been extracting lithium since 1997 when the Fénix project in the Hombre Muerto salt
flat in Catamarca Province started operating. For a long time, this was the only lithium-extracting
project in the country. In recent years, however, the country has been experiencing increased interest
in lithium mining activities due to the global rise in demand for the mineral. In 2016 Argentina was the
most dynamic lithium-producing country in the world, increasing its production from 11 per cent to 16
per cent of the global market as a result of the initiation of a second project in 2015: the Sales de Jujuy
project in the Olaroz salt flat in the Jujuy Province (Dirección de Economía Minera, 2017, p. 3). The project
alone represented 6 per cent of the global lithium production in 2016 and marked a turning point for the
country (Dirección de Economía Minera, 2017, p. 20).
After the removal of a tax2 on exports in February 2016 the country has seen an increased interest and
investments in the sector with more projects on their way. In a report from March 2017, the National
Ministry of Energy and Mining counted 42 projects3 in brine deposits (salt flats) and an additional five in
pegmatite deposits (rocks).4 There are also great expectations from the government sector, as well as
from the private sector, for a new era in which Argentina could play a more important role among the
major global lithium producers.
According to national statistics, total production in 2016 was 30,335 tonnes LCE (lithium carbonate
equivalent), of which 11,845 tonnes were generated by Sales de Jujuy’s project. By the end of 2017
the project was expected to reach its full production capacity of 17,500 tonnes per year. Nevertheless,
the production in 2016 placed Argentina as the world’s third lithium producing country (16 per cent
of the market) after Australia (40 per cent), Chile (33 per cent) and followed by China (6 per cent). The
total projected production for 2017 was 35,500 tonnes. Government projections, taking into account
the most advanced projects, expect to reach 145,500 tonnes per year in 2022 (Dirección de Economía
Minera, 2017, p. 21).
2. In February 2016, after just two months of taking office, the government of Mauricio Macri passed decree 349/2016,
by which an export tax on minerals, in force since 2007, was removed. The measure is a general one, and there was no
specific reference to lithium. Its basis referred to the need to attract more investment.
3. See Annex I for project details (USGS and SEGEMAR).
4. As well as the above-mentioned salt brines and pegmatite rocks, lithium can also be extracted from sea water.
However, this source is still too costly at the moment.
07 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Lithium is used in a variety of products in different industrial areas. The more traditional uses include
ceramics, glass and medicine applications. However, more recent areas involve newer applications
such as the li-ion batteries for smaller electronic devices but also larger batteries for electric and
hybrid cars. Future uses involve the production of nuclear energy through nuclear fusion; this area is
still being researched today.
The market is changing rapidly: in 2016 the use of lithium for batteries (39 per cent) surpassed
traditional uses such as ceramics and glass (30 per cent) and became the largest single end-use
(Dirección de Economía Minera, 2017, p. 15). Undoubtedly, li-ion batteries have many advantages such
as their energy capacity, resistance to discharge and resilience to re-chargeability. Its high performance
and malleability makes it ideal to be transformed into different shapes and hence, used for smaller
electronic devices like cell phones, tablets and laptops. Due to technological developments, high
performing larger li-ion batteries for electric vehicles (EV) have become a reality and are expected to
be an important driver of lithium demand in coming years. In 2016 the global lithium battery market
was worth US$ 22.8 billion and it is expected to reach US$ 95 billion by 2025.5
At present, the production of EV batteries has changed significantly with the appearance of Tesla’s
Gigafactory in Nevada, which started its production in June 2017. To further illustrate future demand,
Tesla planned to produce 500,000 electric cars per year by 2018, which would require today’s entire
global lithium battery supply.6 For example, Tesla’s S model requires 63 kg of LCE per battery, 31,500
tonnes per year considering production of 500,000 cars (Dirección de Economía Minera, 2017, p. 18).
Moreover, actors in the Asian market also have similar plans: Toyota and Nissan have announced that
they will be launching hybrid and pure electrical models in the near future. In 2013 the Asian market
represented 56 per cent of the lithium demand; China had a larger share of 35 per cent (Cochilco, 2013,
p. 27). China also controls around 75 per cent of the market for electrolyte solutions.7 The increase in
demand is also reflected in the price, which has been steadily rising. In 2016 the average price was
US$ 7.475 per tonne of LCE, almost double the price compared to US$ 3.870 only five years earlier
(Dirección de Economía Minera, 2017, p. 9).
According to a report from BIS Research on the global electric vehicles battery market (2017-2026) the
BEV (battery electric vehicle) market for passenger cars is expected to register a compound annual
growth rate (CAGR) of around 20 per cent from 2016-2026, mainly due to favourable governmental
regulations and increased environmental awareness among consumers8. The Asian-Pacific region
is expected to dominate the BEV market. In 2016 the region had a market share of 79.5 per cent,
dominated by the South Asian countries that are home to some of the biggest automotive producers in
the world. At present, China has the largest market for EV batteries.
The European Li-ion battery (LIB) market is expected to grow by 15.9 per cent per year (CAGR) during
2018-2024 (according to a report from 6W Research in February 2018). Today, electronics (cellphones,
tablets, computers etc.) account for the majority of the LIB market in Europe. However, during
2018-2024 the electric vehicle battery (BEV) market is expected to grow the most and surpass batteries
for smaller consumer electronics as a result of enforced government regulations that promote an
increased demand for EVs. Within Europe, Germany is the major consumer of Li-ion batteries, followed
by the UK and France. The Nordic countries are also increasing their share of the market due to the
high usage of EVs, particularly in Norway.
5. See Grand View Research website: https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/lithium-ion-battery-mar-
ket (accessed 30 August 2018).
6. See Tesla website: https://www.tesla.com/gigafactory (accessed 5 January 2018).
7. See Nikkei Asian Review: https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Companies/China-s-lithium-ion-battery-makers-devour-
foreign-rivals(accessed 5 January 2018).
8. See: BIS Group, website https://bisresearch.com/industry-report/global-electric-vehicles-battery-market-2026.html
08 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Furthermore, large investments in LIB and electric vehicle battery (BEV) manufacturing plants across
Europe are expected to be major drivers for the expansion of the region’s market.
For example, the company Northvolt is building Europe’s largest Li-ion battery factory in Sweden; the
German company TerraE is constructing two factories that will produce devices according to customer
specifications; and German company Daimler is currently constructing two factories in Germany that
will supply Mercedes-Benz, among others. LG Chem is also planning a factory in Poland.
The forthcoming Li-ion battery factories in Europe should be seen as part of the expected increase in
demand for EV batteries from European car manufacturers. The Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi alliance
is currently the largest seller globally of pure electric cars, but several major car manufacturers have
similar plans. For instance, Volkswagen (Germany) plans to achieve a 30 per cent EV production by 2025
and has recently announced a partnership with battery producers LG Chem (South Korea), Samsung
(South Korea) and CATL (China) for their EV battery supply. 9 Similarly, Volvo seeks to produce all electric
or hybrid models from 2019. In 2010 Volvo was acquired by the Chinese company Geely, which also owns
shares in the company Honbridge Holdings. In turn, an energy affiliate of Honbridge Holdings signed an
agreement with Volvo in 2017 to provide lithium batteries for Volvo’s production of hybrids and EVs. What
exact connection there is between key car manufacturers, EV battery suppliers and lithium suppliers is not
completely clear as the information publicly available is surrounded by rumours and investor strategies.
For Argentina, the global scenario is nevertheless considered favourable by many, since Argentina – together
with Chile and Bolivia – account for around 80 per cent of the world’s lithium salt-brine reserves in the
area known as the lithium triangle. Currently, lithium can be extracted from three different deposit types,
brine (as in Chile, Bolivia and Argentina), pegmatite (hard-rock) and sedimentary deposits, each requiring
different types of extraction and processing methods. Today, the first two types are the most commonly used
for commercial lithium production. Generally, extraction from brine deposits is more profitable compared
to hard-rock mining, making it a more viable method for Li-ion battery production (Tahil, 2007). However,
this also depends on a variety of factors such as the size of the deposit, the lithium content, amount and
proportion of other elements and weather conditions (evaporation and precipitation rates).
Salt brines are the most common type of lithium deposit and account for 66 per cent of the global
lithium resources. They are mainly found in Chile, Bolivia, Argentina, China and Tibet. Even though
the Bolivian salt flat “Salar de Uyuni” is one of the largest brine deposits, it is not ideal for commercial
production. One of the reasons is that the lithium-magnesium balance in Uyuni is three times higher
than in the Atacama region, which makes it more difficult and costly to refine the salt into lithium
carbonate or other compounds. Extraction in Uyuni is also more challenging due to slower evaporation
rates and to an extent, more state policy seeking to develop national extraction techniques without
external collaboration. Although this was successful it has delayed the initial plans considerably. In
comparison to Uyuni, the Argentinian salt flats have a more favourable lithium-magnesium balance
for commercial production purposes, which means it is less complicated and less expensive to extract.
However, the Atacama salt flats in Chile rank first in terms of extraction conditions.
The Argentine national and provincial governments see the current lithium boom as an opportunity for
the country in different ways: government officials (and mining representatives) claim that the increase
in investment will bring more income in the form of tax revenues and royalties; and also more direct
and indirect employment can be created from increased investment and projects.10 The government
9. Reuters: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-volkswagen-results/volkswagen-assigns-25-billion-in-battery-or-
ders-in-electric-car-drive-idUSKCN1GP12B?feedType=RSS&feedName=businessNews&utm_source=feedburn-
er&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+reuters%2FbusinessNews+%28Business+News%29 (accessed
27 October 2018).
10. El Tribuno: https://www.eltribuno.com/jujuy/nota/2018-5-7-21-47-0-seis-proyectos-de-litio-se-desarrollaran-en-ju-
juy (accessed 27 October 2018).
09 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

support can be seen in different policies such as declaring lithium a strategic mineral at the provincial
level11 or creating public companies to take part in different initiatives. However, little consideration
has been given to the local impacts of lithium extraction and the effects on human rights, or the social
and environmental sustainability of the various projects.
3. The mining model in Argentina: trends since the 1990s
Argentina cannot be considered to be a mining country like many of its neighbours, as the main focus of
its economic activity since independence has been agriculture and livestock. Although there was some
mining activity before, it was only at the end of the 20th century when extraction shifted to a bigger scale.
Today, the Argentine mining sector is characterised by the strong participation of private actors, especially
international companies, with a significant presence of capital from Australia, Canada and the United
States, especially since the mining boom of the 1990s.
The Mining Code, which has been in effect since 1887, regulates how mines are acquired, exploited
transferred and closed. It establishes that, although mines are within the domain of the State, they cannot
be exploited or disposed of by the State; hence, the mines must be exploited through the mining concessions
system. At the same time, domestic and foreign investors will receive equal treatment (Zilla, 2013).
In the 1990s, in order to attract investment to the sector, the legal framework was reformed, offering a
package of benefits to those interested in mining activity. Through the sanction of the Mining Investment
Law 24.196, issued in 1993, a set of attractions for investors was offered, including fiscal stability for a
term of 30 years. This means that the tax or tariff burdens are not modified, nor are the benefits or the
exchange rate regime reduced in that period. Among other advantages, it is possible to deduct 100
per cent of the costs incurred in terms of feasibility of the project-prospecting, exploration, special
studies, pilot plants and amortising the expenditures in infrastructure of the amount corresponding to
the income tax (FARN, 2012). These measures are still current.
This law also eliminated all taxes, including municipal taxes and stamp duties. The set of benefits and
exemptions culminates with the setting of royalties at 3 per cent of the pithead price; that is, what was
extracted in the first stage of production.
When this incentive regime was consolidated, investments began to increase with a consequent
growth in the number of projects, production and exports, particularly regarding large-scale mining
operations through open pit techniques that enable companies to extract less concentrated minerals.
The sector is export oriented and criticised within society for its lack of spillover effects on employment
and economic wealth (Marchegiani y Di Paola, 2017; y Svampa, 2013).
Lithium mining is also under the same regime, which has had few changes since the 1990s, adding
mainly environmental and indigenous regulations. These will be addressed in the next section.
At present, the position of Argentina in the lithium supply chain is principally as a raw material
exporter. The majority of Argentina’s lithium exports go to the United States (55 per cent) and China
(28 per cent), followed by Japan (8 per cent) (Dirección de Economía Minera, 2017, p. 20). Due to the
mineral’s importance for battery manufacturers and automobile industries, end-use companies such
as car manufacturers also get involved in the extraction stage to secure their supply. This can be seen,
for example, in Nissan’s connection to the Fénix project in Catamarca, and the joint venture between
Orocobre Limited and Toyota Tsusho Corporation through the Sales de Jujuy project, and between
Minera Exar and Mitsubishi. These last two are included in this study.
11. Jujuy has declared lithium a strategic mineral through decree N°7592/11.
10 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

These alliances are an indicator of how the global lithium flow is currently developing. The first
stage of lithium mining is dominated by Chile, Australia, the US, Argentina and China, where the first
chemical treatments of the mineral also mainly occur. The largest global exporters are Chile, Australia
and Argentina, while the largest importing countries are the US, China, Japan, South Korea and the
EU. In the next stage of product manufacturing, lithium batteries (LIB) production are concentrated in
China, South Korea and Japan while the trade of LIBs is largest from South Korea to China and Japan to
the US. Hence, China is both one of the largest producers and importers of LIBs, followed by the US and
the EU in terms of imports. Lastly, the trade flow of LIB-containing products (i.e. cellphones and tablets)
is largest from China to the US (Sun et al. 2017, p. 53).
The amount of lithium used for LIB production was about 30 per cent of the global lithium consumption
in 2014, 39 per cent in 2016, and is only expected to increase. The LIB production can further be broken
down according to its application. In 2014, 75 per cent of the total LIB production involved consumer
electronics such as cellphones, tablets, portable computers etc., while the LIB used for EVs was 24
per cent of production. Of the LIB production for EVs, China dominated the production for electric
buses (both all electric and plug-in hybrids) and the US dominated the production of electric passenger
vehicles, followed by Europe and China (Sun et al. 2017, p. 53). However, this scenario might be about to
change as a number of LIB factories (for consumer electronics and EV batteries) are planned or already
under construction in Europe, which presumably will increase the European imports of LCE12.
Although Argentina’s main position in the supply chain remains as a raw material exporter, over the
last decade a number of debates have emerged regarding the opportunities presented by the global
scenario, particularly relating to the challenges and opportunities of industrialisation of batteries in
the country. With this in mind, different research and policy initiatives seeking to add value to the
extraction processes have emerged. These will be addressed in the next section.
3.1. Is it different with lithium? Attempts to industrialise
Argentina’s first scientific contact with lithium battery production happened between 2005 and 2006
when the National Atomic Energy Commission (Comisión Nacional de Energía Atómica, CNEA) was
commissioned to produce, control and test the battery of an Argentine satellite to be placed in the
American orbit. This experience introduced Argentine scientists to lithium batteries (Fornillo, 2015,
p. 60). During the government of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner (2007-2015), the mineral was given
broader attention as several efforts were made to modify Argentina’s role as a commodity exporter.
The attention did not only come from the different agencies in the executive power, but also from
Congress. Its interest stemmed from different requests of reports to the executive power between 2010
and 2014. Moreover, six legal projects were proposed in Congress with intention to regulate the matter.
In general, the proposals all sought to declare lithium as a strategic natural resource at the national
level in line with statements already made at the provincial level by Salta and Jujuy provinces. These
projects sought to create state-owned enterprises to regulate the market and ensure that the National
Government had a more a prominent role to play in lithium strategies. Until today, these projects have
not been approved.
In 2011 a fundamental step towards industrialisation was taken when a working group was created with
the objective of promoting scientific and technological research to enable industrial development. The
group consisted of representatives from the Ministry of Industry, the National Council for Scientific and
Technical Research (CONICET), the Agency for Scientific and Technological Promotion, the National
Institute of Industrial Technology (INTI), as well as public and private actors in related sectors. The group
was to devise a strategy to produce batteries to supply the national programme “Conectar Igualdad”
(Connect Equality Programme), a federal government programme created in 2010 to reduce digital,
12. Lithium Carbonate Equivalent.
11 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

educational and social gaps in the country. The programme distributes netbooks to all students and
teachers of public secondary schools, special education and state-owned teacher training institutes.13
It was believed the programme would secure a steady demand for the domestic batteries. Initially,
the Ministry of Science invested US$ 500,000 in the project – by supporting a research group. The
additional funds needed would be supplied by the project counterpart Plaka, a smaller private Argentine
company producing conventional batteries, with an interest to realise production of Li-ion batteries. As
the production process takes time, Plaka would assemble batteries from imported components in the
meantime before the proper production could start. This strategy was also used by Probattery, another
major battery supplier of the programme Conectar Igualdad.14 The idea was to install the production
plant in the province of Catamarca to locally supply the netbook manufacturers (Fornillo, 2015, p. 63).
In 2012 the second important step was taken by the Ministry of Industry by connecting additional
sources of financing among potential market actors. These included almost all actors involved in the
potential added value chain; state and province representatives, researchers and companies working
on the industrialisation process and potential market actors. The investments were quite large –
between US$ 15-30 million – at this point it was confirmed the battery cells would be in production by
2013 (Fornillo, 2015, p. 64).
However, for different reasons, concerns started to arise. First, the essential component of battery cells
– separators – was, at least at that time, only produced in Japan. This meant dealing with patents which
would increase costs significantly. Second, market actors started questioning the amount of capital
required to install the plant in Catamarca and how profitable it would be. Third, computer manufacturers
for the “Conectar Igualdad” programme voiced concerns that the price of domestic batteries would be
too high in comparison to the ones imported from Asia. Finally, the National Institute for Industrial
Technology (INTI) expressed pessimism towards Argentina’s capacity to produce batteries, which made
the Ministry of Industry change their strategy and opinion on the matter (Fornillo, 2015, p. 66).
In summary, the battery factory in Catamarca did not come about. Analysts emphasised different views
among the public and the private sector regarding the technical feasibility. Also, the technical process
has been highlighted as a central aspect of the problem: it required closer collaboration between
science, technology and production. In addition, the lack of political will and policies supporting
industrial innovation together with insufficient scientific budgets were seen as the main explanatory
factors (Fornillo, 2015).
A second attempt
In 2012 Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales (YPF),15 the state-owned energy company, created the sub-
company Y-TEC together with the National Council for Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET)
(owned in a 51 per cent of the shares by YPF and 49 per cent by CONICET) with the objective of
supporting the industrialisation of lithium-extracting efforts. At the same time, Jujuy Province started
working on a strategy to add value to production. Part of the strategy has been to promote a greater
corporate control and to create a scientific hub that can produce the necessary research advancements
and human resources. In 2011 the public provincial company Jujuy Energía y Minería S.E. (JEMSE) was
created with the objective of owning part of the lithium extraction projects (between 5 per cent and
13. Ministerio de Educación: http://educacion.gob.ar/conectar-igualdad/seccion/142/el-programa (accessed 5
January 2018).
14. Probattery is one of Argentina’s largest battery companies. In 2012 the company increased production to supply the
“Conectar Igualdad” programme as a result of a larger investment. The company has also considered engaging in cell
production but the technical and economic challenges were considered too big a risk. However, the company continued to
supply the programme after Plaka and are today a consolidated actor in the market (Fornillo, 2015, p. 72).
15. In 2012 51 per cent of the company was re-nationalised by an initiative from President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner.
The initiative was approved with broad support in both houses of congress. The re-nationalised 51 per cent was divided
between the national state (26.01 per cent) and 10 of the country’s provinces (24.99 per cent).
12 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

8.5 per cent). This was done to assure domestic supply for the province. As part of the strategy, the
Technological Development Centre “General Manuel Savio” (Instituto del Litio) was inaugurated at
the end of August 2017. This was a collaboration between CONICET, the National University of Jujuy
(UNJu) and Y-TEC.16
In 2016 Y-TEC, the Italian battery producer FIB-FAAM (part of the Seri Group) and JEMSE signed an
agreement to install a li-ion battery plant in Palpalá, Jujuy. According to the Ministry of Mining, the
investment would reach US$ 60 million over the following two years (Dirección de Economía Minera,
2017, p. 22), and the plant was to be opened in March 2018. However, this had not happened at the
time of finalising this study. According to the agreement, Y-TEC and Lithops17 (the company owned by
FBI-FAAM) will be partners; Lithops will provide crucial technical know-how. The company managing
the plant is Jujuy Litio S.A. owned by the provincial government (60 per cent) and the Seri Group (40
per cent) with support from UNJu and the Instituto del Litio.18 The projected market for the batteries
is domestic public transportation, an area in which the Seri Group has experience. The production
has three stages: first to assemble batteries; second, to produce cells; and third, to produce complete
batteries. The Ministry of Energy and Mining projects production to reach around 5 per cent of the
electric vehicles in the Argentine automobile market by 2020 (about 35,000 units). This would be done
by requiring less than 3 per cent of the country’s current lithium production (Dirección de Economía
Minera, 2017). Nevertheless, the result of Argentina’s efforts to industrialise and move beyond raw
material extraction still remains to be seen.
4. Decision-making on natural resources in a Federal State
Argentina is a Federal State comprised of 23 autonomous provinces. These provinces all have their own
constitution and have all the powers that were not expressly delegated in the Federal State during the
period when the nation’s constitution was written (1810-1880). Since natural resources such as minerals
are owned by the provinces, it is this sub-national entity that is responsible for decision-making when
it comes to mining. National and provincial regulations inform the context and conditions under
which projects can start operating. These are generally discussed as part of an environmental impact
assessment (EIA) process. Provinces are also responsible for implementing consultation processes to
ensure that affected communities participate in decision-making. These points will be addressed in the
following section.
4.1. Environmental legal framework
The legal framework of EIA process follows Argentina’s federal system whereby the provinces have
autonomy to enact their own regulations within their territorial limits. Nevertheless, the National
constitution guarantees human rights, including the right to a healthy environment19 and the national
government has the legal authority to set minimum environmental regulation standards enforceable
in the whole country.
The National Law N° 25.675, known as the “Ley General del Ambiente” (LGA) (General Environmental
Protection Law), establishes the guidelines, main institutions of the national environmental policy and
16. See CONICET: http://www.conicet.gov.ar/se-inauguro-el-centro-de-desarrollo-tecnologico-general-savio-en-jujuy/
(accessed 5 January 2018).
17. See Lithops website: http://www.lithops.it/lithops/Enter.html (accessed 5 January 2018).
18. See El Cronista: https://www.cronista.com/negocios/Instalan-en-Jujuy-la-primera-planta-de-baterias-de-litio-de-
Sudamerica-20171215-0048.html (accessed 5 January 2018).
19. National Constitution, Article 41: “All inhabitants enjoy the right to a healthy, balanced environment fit for human
development, so that productive activities satisfy current needs without compromising those of future generations,
and have the duty to preserve the environment...”
13 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

instruments or tools for the management of the environment. Among these tools, the EIA procedure is
not only central but also the key instrument to analyse environmental decisions on the ground. An EIA
must be carried out before authorising any activity and/or work that can produce significant impacts
on the environment (or any of its components) or on the quality of life of the population.20 The public
office responsible for analysing the EIA and authorising any activity with potential environmental
impacts is designated by the provincial government, where the activity or work will be done.
The EIA is part of a process with different phases, which vary according to the provincial legislation.
However, they should at least include:
• A statement from the person (or company or entity) interested in performing an activity in which it
is explained whether the environment would be affected or not.
• The submission of an environmental impact study or report (EIA report) with the identification and
description of possible impacts and mitigation measures.
• A public participation phase (consultation or public hearing) in which citizens discuss the project
and its possible implications for communities. The consultation is the opportunity to present objections
and/or comments in a written form. This phase requires adequate and timely access to environmental
information related to the project so as to ensure effective citizen participation. If this is not fulfilled,
the process could be nullified. This stage is not binding on the approval of the project. This means
that the authority conducting the evaluation may make a decision that is different from the opinion of
the hearing as long as it is justified (unlike the latter, the Convention 169 of the International Labour
Organization established a binding consultation, which is explained below).
• A decision of the public authority regarding the project. There are three possibilities: 1) authorising
the project through a declaration of environmental impacts (DIA in Spanish); 2) rejecting the project; or
3) authorising it under certain conditions (i.e. requiring changes from the original project). The decision
depends on whether the project respects the national and provincial environmental legislation and
minimum standards.
In Jujuy Province, the public authority that make decisions about the projects is the Office of Mining
and Energy Resources (part of the Mining and Hydrocarbons Secretariat of Jujuy). It could reject the
projects if the reports do not fulfill the contents established by the provincial decree 5707-2010,21 and
other norms. This decree regulates the procedure for the EIA related to mining activities in the province.
The procedure first includes the intervention of the Unit of Environmental Management of the province
(UGAMP),22 which has the duty to give technical advice to the Office of Mining and Energy Resources.
This unit has representatives of different provincial agencies as well as non-governmental stakeholders
and is in charge of granting its opinion before a decision is made. Among the governmental agencies
with representatives in the unit are: Environmental Management Agency, Human Rights, Public Health,
Environmental Policy Department, Industry and Commerce, and Water Resources. Other representatives
include: the National University of Jujuy, the Centre of Geologists, mining companies, municipal authorities
and indigenous communities.
20. Law N° 25.675. General Environmental Law 28/11/2001. Articles 11-13.
21. The decree regulates the integration of environmental legislation and the environmental chapter in the Mining
Code (Law Nº 24.585/95). More information available at: http://www.estrucplan.com.ar/Legislacion/jujuy/decretos/
dec05707-10.asp
22. Created by decree N° 2881/97.
14 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

In 2011 the procedure was modified by the decree 7592/2011,23 which declared lithium as a strategic
natural resource for Jujuy. The decree also subjected lithium-mining projects to an integral analysis
carried out by an expert committee. The committee is composed of experts from CONICET and
the National University of Jujuy, who are nominated by the provincial congress, the Environmental
Management Agency and the provincial mining department.
Elements of the EIA process and the free, prior and informed consent rights (FPIC) in the case study will
be analysed in the report.
4.2. Consultation and Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) rights
The indigenous population in Argentina has systematically been denied and excluded throughout the
country’s history. It was only in the 1990s that indigenous rights were recognized at the Constitutional
level, marking a turning point in the realisation of human rights for indigenous populations.
Through the constitutional reform of 1994, Argentina recognised the ethnic and cultural pre-existence
of the Argentine indigenous people24 and the community property rights for indigenous people to the
lands they have traditionally occupied, as well as the right to manage the land’s natural resources.
The right to land possession is to be neither alienable, transferable, nor susceptible to encumbrance
or seizure. Moreover, Argentina has adhered to international agreements such as the Inter-American
Charter of Human Rights and the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People (UNDRIP),
which Argentina ratified in 2007. In 2000, Argentina also ratified the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
Convention 169 of the International Labour Organization (ILO), a convention of supra-legal nature that
is considered to supersede national law.
The convention establishes that indigenous peoples who might be affected are to be consulted
regarding any legislative or administrative measure concerning them, and that this is the responsibility
of the state. It also stipulates that participation of indigenous peoples in decision-making processes
should be free and carried out in good faith with the objective of consent (ILO C169, Article 6). Also,
specifically relating to extractive activities, it emphasises that consultations should take place prior
to any approval of exploration or exploitation (ILO C169, Article 15). In this process the opinion of
indigenous peoples is binding to the whole process of approval of the activity.
On the other hand, UNDRIP, a declaration – in comparison to ILO C169 (a convention) – has a character
of soft law. Neither does UNDRIP stipulate any “new rights”; rather it is an interpretation of the already
established universal human rights and international conventions applied to the situation of indigenous
peoples. Nevertheless, it is in UNDRIP that the FPIC principle is clarified and consolidated. In the
declaration for indigenous peoples’ right to self-determination, it is clearly stated in Article 3 (UNDRIP,
Article 3) and, in relation to extractive activities, it states indigenous people have the right to determine
how to use their lands and resources. It also says that states should “obtain their free and informed
consent prior to the approval of any project affecting their lands or territories and other resources,
particularly in connection with the development, utilization or exploitation of mineral, water or other
resources” (UNDRIP, Article 32, paragraph 2).
In summary, both ILO C169 and UNDRIP, along with the FPIC principle, apply to Argentina. However,
despite the recognition of indigenous people’s land rights since 1994 and adherence to international
legal norms, FPIC has not yet been implemented in federal or provincial legislation. As a result
Argentina has several times been subject to international criticism. For example, in 2016 Amnesty
23. Decree Nº 7592/11. Declaration of lithium as a strategic mineral in the province of Jujuy. Published 11 March 2011;
Jujuy Province.
24. Law 23.302 passed in 1985.
15 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

International called for the Argentine government to develop a legal framework on consultation and
FPIC, because “even though the right of the indigenous people to a consultation is part of Argentina’s
legal framework as a signatory country of international instruments, there is no law or policy, either
federal or provincial, that regulates the consultation procedure with the indigenous people” (Amnesty
International 2017, 20).
However, efforts have been made to advance federal and provincial legislation on the matter. Law
26.160, sanctioned in 2006, made the communal titles (recognition of land ownership of indigenous
communities) reappear on the national agenda. The law entrusts the National Institute of Indigenous
Affairs (INAI) with a budget of around US$ 20 million, to orchestrate what is called the National Survey
of Indigenous Territories Programme (RETECI). The programme’s objective is to survey and demarcate
the territories of indigenous people, generating conditions and information that is instrumental in the
recognition of the possession and community property of all the lands occupied by indigenous people
in the country.25 Each ethnic group elects a representative in an assembly where all communities of that
ethnic group participate. The representative is part of the Council of Indigenous Participation (CPI) within
the INAI and is the link between the institution and the communities (García Moritán & Cruz, 2012, p.
168). Although the process of land regularisation is directed by the INAI, it is important to note that it
still operates within a federal system. It is also shaped by the territorial development model introduced
in 2004, which promotes a model of decentralised governance. Therefore, the delivery of community
property titles remains within provincial government (Brent, 2015, p. 682).
However, the implementation of this right generally remains unfulfilled, which is mostly due to the
slow speed of INAI’s performance. While there have been minor achievements in terms of securing
community land holdings, there have also been simultaneous processes that threaten indigenous
people’s right to territory. First is the ongoing privatisation of land that has been unfolding since the
implementation of neoliberal reforms in Argentina, also known as the adoption of the “Washington
Consensus”. In the past 15 years, the economic model has shifted towards the “Commodities Consensus”
which, although based on a political rejection of neoliberalism, has led to a deeper dependency on
natural resource extraction and primary commodity production (Svampa, 2013). Argentine public
policies have enormously fostered the development of large-scale agriculture and mining over the last
two decades. There is a wide range of laws, instruments and institutional measures at the national and
provincial level to encourage and facilitate the implementation of mineral exploitation projects, from
which lithium projects also benefit (Göbel, 2013).
In Jujuy Province, the first Registry of Aboriginal Communities was created in 1992, granting
communities legal status under the rules of civil associations; until then, the existence of a significant
indigenous population in the province had been denied (García Moritán & Cruz, 2012, p. 158).26 Further
advancements were made in 1997 when INAI and the provincial government signed an agreement to
launch the Programme to Regularise and Allocate Lands to Jujuy’s Indigenous Population (PRATPAJ).
It officially recognised indigenous territorial rights as part of the province’s land titling programme.
What is notable, however, is that the organisation to receive the national funds, and to be in charge of
delivering the community land titles, is the Jujeño Institute of Colonisation (IJC). Created in 1988, the
institute has had the historical function of granting private land titles for the purpose of productive
forestry or large-scale agriculture (Borghini, 2010, p. 137). The province’s failure to deliver no more
than four community land titles in the first few years of operation led indigenous communities to file a
lawsuit against the provincial state in 2003.
25. Martínez, A. (27 September 2017). Comunidades indígenas de Argentina corren el riesgo de ser desalojadas si no se
prorroga una ley que las protege. La Diaria: http://bit.ly/2hBZJGr (accessed 5 January 2018).
26. Nowadays the 10 communities are recognised by the Registry of Aboriginal Communities.
16 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

In 2006, the Contentious-Administrative Court ruled in favour of the plaintiffs, ordering the provincial
state to recognise the community titles requested, and the application of the right to prior consultation
(Solá, 2016). With this, the process has been slightly more efficient, but it still remains slow. In 2013,
16 years after the initiation of PRATPAJ, the Jujuy public notary claimed 44 of the communities that
had demanded communal land titles had received them, representing only one third of the requested
titles (OEA, 2013, p. 14) and only 16 per cent of the 266 indigenous communities living in Jujuy Province
(Zamudio, 2011).
Consultations are generally not applied, or if they are applied, they suffer from different problems and
flaws that could lead to the nullification of these processes (e.g. lack of environmental information,
absence of state representatives during the process, and the use of a technical language that is difficult
for communities to understand).
In many cases the EIA is applied together with a consultation phase that seeks to articulate FPIC rights.
The application of FPIC rights in the context of EIA projects will be thoroughly analysed in the case study.
5. The case of Olaroz-Caucharí salt flat
In Argentina lithium activities are concentrated in the three northwestern provinces of Jujuy, Salta and
Catamarca. The Fénix project in the Hombre Muerto salt flat, located on the border between the Salta
and Catamarca provinces, with a current production capacity of 17,000 tonnes of LCE/year, was the only
operating lithium project in Argentina for almost 20 years. The second project to start operating was
the Sales de Jujuy project in Olaroz-Caucharí, which started in 2015. Minera Exar project located in the
same salt flat of Olaroz-Caucharí just south of the Sales de Jujuy project, started filling the first pond
in November 2018 and expects to begin plant construction in 2019. Among the other most advanced
projects that are about to initiate production in the near future: three27 are imminent; five are in an
advanced exploration phase; 12 are in an initiating exploration phase; and 17 are in prospecting phase.
This study has chosen to focus on the two projects located in the Olaroz-Caucharí salt flat: Sales de Jujuy
and Minera Exar. First, because these projects together mark the initiation of a new phase of projects
following the increase in global lithium demand over the last decade. Moreover, the Sales de Jujuy project,
as it was the first to start lithium extraction since 1997, is considered to be the first greenfield (beginning
from zero) project to start operation in salt-brines after 20 years.28 Second, because the Olaroz-Caucharí
area is home to 10 indigenous Atacama communities.
As new extractive activities arrive in the area they bring change to a variety of aspects, reconfiguring
relationships among different actors. While they present many opportunities, they also bring challenges.
The projects provide an interesting opportunity to study the social and environmental aspects of lithium
extraction considering the salt flat’s unique geographical and cultural context. Olaroz-Caucharí is a
closed water basin at 4,300 metres above sea level. It is considered a fragile ecosystem with water stress
throughout the year where indigenous communities have lived since ancestral times, depending on land
and natural resources (Puente y Argento, 2015; Sticco, 2018). Also looking at projects from two different
companies allows the authors to compare different corporate strategies, compliance and results.
27. The Galaxy Resources project in Salar del Hombre Muerto, the Eramet project in Centenario and Ratones, and the
Rincon Group project in Salar del Rincón.
28. More information is available at: https://www.cronista.com/especiales/Litio-una-industria-nacional-
posible-20170517-0006.html
17 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

The social and economic situation in the communities has already been altered and uncertainties
regarding the environmental situation have arisen. Hence, focusing the study on the two projects
enables the study to address the question of how nearby local and indigenous communities are affected
by large-scale lithium mining in terms of social, economic and environmental impacts.
FIGURE 1: MAP SHOWING THE LOCATION OF THE LITHIUM PRODUCING
PROVINCES IN ARGENTINA
18 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

FIGURE 2: MAP SHOWING LOCATION OF LITHIUM EXTRACTING PROJECTS
IN OLAROZ CAUCHARÍ
5.1. The companies
The following section offers more detail on the main companies involved in the two projects in the study.
5.1.1. Sales de Jujuy
In 2010 the Australian mining company Orocobre, Toyota Tsusho (Japan) and JEMSE (Argentina) initiated
a joint venture for the Salar de Olaroz project and hence, started the first lithium-extracting project in
Argentina since 1997. Orocobre’s assets at Salar de Olaroz are owned and held by the project company,
Sales de Jujuy (Orocobre 66.5%) and contain those properties associated with the Olaroz Lithium Facility.
Orocobre’s partners in Sales de Jujuy are Toyota Tsusho Corporation (25%) and JEMSE (8.5%).
The project company, Sales de Jujuy, handles the daily management and operations while JEMSE
provides assistance in interpreting and administrating local and federal government procedures and
practices. Orocobre is mainly responsible for leading the management and operations in Argentina,
while Toyota Tsusho is responsible for managing the necessary funding from Mizuho Bank with
guarantees from Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation in exchange for sales rights. Toyota
Tsusho Corporation is an equity partner and also the exclusive sales agent for the sale of lithium
carbonate. Due to a joint marketing agreement between Orocobre and Toyota Tsusho Corporation,
Orocobre is involved in the strategic and planning aspects of the sales process.
The EIA procedure began in 2010 when the company presented the first environmental study report.
However, due to additional requirements from UGAMP and amendments in the licensing procedure,
the project was not approved until 2012. In 2015 the plant started operating and in 2016 the production
was 11,845 tonnes of LCE (prices increased from below US$ 6,000/tonne at the beginning of the financial
year to more than double that at the end of 2016).
19 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

In 2018 Orocobre announced the increase of Stage 2 Expansion at the Olaroz Lithium Facility to 25,000
tonne per annum (total 42,500 tonne per annum) from the previously announced 17,500 tonne per
annum (average price on the quarter from October to December 2018 was US$ 10,587 per tonne).
(Orocobre, 2018)
Orocobre is an Australian mineral resource company created in 2006 mainly working with lithium.
The company operates exclusively in Argentina where it is active in various projects. Through the
company Borax Argentina, it also operates various boron mines. On 2016, Orocobre and Advantage
Lithium signed a joint venture agreement for the project Caucharí in Salar de Cuacharí (the exploration
program is being managed by Advantage Lithium). On 2017, Orocobre sold to Advantage Lithium Corp
a number of lithium brine exploration projects.
The other part of the joint venture is Toyota Tsusho Corporation, a trading company member of the
Toyota Group whose main objective is to support and supply Toyota Motor. Among other activities,
the company’s metals section is the largest and most important one as it aims to secure supplies and
materials for Toyota. Through the joint venture agreement, Toyota Tsusho acquired 100 per cent of the
LCE production sales rights from the project.29
Funding for the project is provided by one of Japan’s megabanks, Mizuho Corporate Bank, while the
Japanese public company Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC) stands as a debt
guarantor. The fact that financing and guarantees come from Japanese partners in return for sales
rights is not a surprise. Lithium has been declared as a national interest in Japan as the country is fully
dependent on imports of the natural resource.30
FIGURE 3: SALES DE JUJUY´S JOINT VENTURE
ADVANTAGE TOYOTA TTC is the exclusive
LITHIUM 33.5% OROCOBRE 15% TSUSHO sales agent with
(Vancouver BC Canada) (Australia) (TTC) Orocobre and TTC
(Japan) exercising joint
control over
marketing,
72.68% 27.32% product allocation
75% 25% (SDJ S.A. 66.5%) (SDJ S.A. 25%) and terms.
CAUCHARI LITHIUM HOLDING COMPANY
JEMSE
PROJECT JV SALES DE JUJUY PTE. LTD.
(Jujuy, Argentina)
(Jujuy, Argentina) (Singapore)
91.5% 8.5%
100%
(Common Share) (Class B Share)
BORAX
ARGENTINA S.A. PROJECT COMPANY - SALES DE JUJUY S.A.
(Salta, Argentina) (Jujuy, Argentina)
Debt Guarantee
LENDER GUARANTOR
(Mizuho) (JOGMEC)
Source: Orocobre Limited.
29. Toyota Tsusho website: http://www.toyota-tsusho.com/english/about/project/04/ (accessed 12 October 2017).
30. Ibid.
20 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

5.1.2. Minera Exar
In 2016 the Canadian company Lithium Americas Corp. (LAC) and the Chilean company Sociedad
Química y Minera de Chile S.A. (SQM) agreed to enter a 50/50 joint venture for the Minera Exar project.
JEMSE also joined the project with an 8.5 per cent ownership share.
Lithium Americas focuses exclusively on lithium as it seeks to strategically control the mineral´s market
shares and pricing (Göbel, Seminar, 2017) with operations in Nevada in the US, and in the northwest
of Argentina. Apart from Minera Exar, the company participates in various additional explorations
together with SQM in the Arizaro and Pocitos salt flats in the Salta province. The Chilean SQM on the
other hand is the world’s largest lithium producer. It is a private company created in 1968 focusing on
a variety of minerals and industrial chemicals, lithium representing only 10 per cent of the company’s
sales. Most of the company’s plants and resources are located in the Chilean Atacama Desert.
It was essential for Lithium Americas to find investors to secure its financing. In January 2017 the Chinese
company Jiangxi Ganfeng Lithium Co. LTD (GFL Lithium Co. LTD) made a strategic investment in Lithium
Americas, becoming the largest single shareholder by acquiring 19.9 per cent of the company’s shares.
According to the agreement, GFL Lithium Co. LTD is providing US$ 125 million in funding for Lithium
Americas’ share of the Minera Exar project construction costs. The agreement also gave GFL Lithium
Co. LTD the right to buy 70 per cent of Lithium Americas’ share of Minera Exar Stage 1 LCE production
at market prices for the coming 20 years.31 Currently GFL Lithium Co. LTD owns the 16.94 per cent of the
Lithium Americas shares. It is known as China’s largest integrated lithium producer and is also a leading
actor on the world market. Besides owning shares in Lithium Americas, GFL Lithium Co. LTD also owns
stakes in lithium projects in Australia, Canada and Ireland as well as additional projects in Argentina.
An agreement between Lithium Americas and Bangchak Corporation Public Co. LTD. was also made shortly
afterwards: BCP Innovation PTE. LTD acquired 16.4 per cent of the company’s shares. The terms of the
agreement are similar: BCP Innovation PTE. LTD will provide US$ 80 million to fund the project in return
for the right to buy 15 per cent of Stage 1 Minera Exar LCE production.32 Currently BCP Innovation PTE. LTD
owns the 15.85 per cent of the Lithium Americas shares. Bangchak Corporation Public Co. LTD is a Thai
company traditionally focused on petroleum refining but which recently entered the green energy sector.
It is interesting to note that GFL Lithium Co. LTD and SQM have tried to reach an agreement regarding
operations in Chile but without success. SQM has also had difficulties expanding operations in Chile as the
company has been involved in scandals regarding investigations about tax evasion, bribery and financing
political parties during 2016-2017. This is referred to as The SQM Affair or Scandal in the media33.
According to the NI 43 – 101 Technical report of LAC (Effective Date: 29 March 2017 / Filing Date: 15
January 2018) the last EIA for exploration was presented to the provincial government in February
2017. According to an interview with Miguel Soler (Secretary of Mining and Hydrocarbons of Jujuy),34
this was approved in August 2017.
In October 2018, Lithium Americas announced the result of a transaction between GFL Lithium Co. LTD
and SQM. As a result of this, GFL Lithium Co. LTD acquired a 37.5 per cent interest stake in Minera Exar
S.A from SQM, while Lithium Americas holds the remaining 62.5 per cent.
31. Transcript of Jiangxi Ganfeng Lithium Co., LTD Investment Conference Call, 18 January 2017. Available at: http://lithiu-
mamericas.com/investors/events/ (accessed 11 January 2018).
32. MarketWired: http://www.marketwired.com/press-release/lithium-americas-announces-us112-million-strategic-in-
vestment-by-bangchak-petroleum-tsx-lac-2189722.htm (accessed 12 January 2018).
33. For example see: https://www.laizquierdadiario.cl/SQM-escandalo-saqueo-e-impunidad (accessed 10 January 2019);
https://www.theclinic.cl/2015/04/06/caso-sqm-el-pais-dice-que-es-el-nuevo-escandalo-de-corrupcion-que-ahonda-la-
crisis-politica-en-chile/ (accessed 10 January 2019)
34. The Secretary of Mining and Hydrocarbons of Jujuy was interviewed on November 2017 as part of this research.
21 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

FIGURE 4: EXAR´S JOINT VENTURE
GFL BCP
LITHIUM INNOVATION
CO. LTD PTE. LTD
(China) (Thailand)
16.94% 15.85%
JEMSE
LITHIUM AMERICAS GANFENG LITHIUM (Jujuy,
(Canada) (China)
Argentina)
62.5% 37.5% Right to 8.5%
interest
PROJECT COMPANY MINERA EXAR S.A.
(Jujuy, Argentina)
Source: Proper elaboration based on official company information.
5.2. State representatives
Provincial state agencies have different responsibilities and duties regarding lithium projects. The
local mining secretary has roles that seem to contradict each other: they are in charge of promoting
mining in the province, and at the same time they are responsible for granting permission to companies
to start exploitation as well as being the main monitoring body.
The provincial environmental agency seeks to provide and ensure environmental protection. Together
with the Mining Secretary, it must coordinate the environmental protection measures for each
mining project. It is part of the evaluation process of the environmental impact reports, analysing
its correspondence with the national and provincial environmental regulations. The environmental
agency is also part of the UGAMP. The provincial General Direction of Water Resources is in charge of
ensuring water is used sustainably and reasonably. Consequently, it is responsible for the concession
and control of water uses in mining operations in accordance with the disposals of the Provincial Water
Code and in conjunction with the Mining Secretary. Article 63, paragraph 3, of the Water Code stipulates
that water used in mining operations must be returned in such a way that it cannot affect third parties.
Article 27 of the Water Code also dictates that the extent to which water access is granted must be
specifically quantified and therefore controlled by the implementing authority (General Direction of
Water Resources).
However, despite these different roles, the agencies do not always work together or collaborate sufficiently.
22 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

5.3. The Atacama communities: social and political organisation
The area of the Olaroz-Caucharí salt flat is populated by 10 indigenous communities of the Atacama
ethnic group. Of the 10 communities, seven have communal land titles, two do not hold any land titles
and one of them is currently in the process of registering its title.35 The 10 communities are located in
the Susques department, which has a population of approximately 3,600 people.36 All the communities
have similar political institutions and decision-making procedures. These are defined in their community
statute. Each community is led by a president, a council and an assembly. The president and the council
are the executive body and are regularly elected, usually for a period of two years. The assembly is the
main decision-making body in which all relevant issues are presented, discussed and voted on. It is held
usually once a month. All adults of the community have the right to participate and vote. The young
and elderly are invited to attend, but do not need to do so. If consensus is not reached in the assembly,
decisions are made by simple majority.
Traditionally the communities in the area have been dedicated to livestock – mainly tending sheep,
llamas and goats. Other traditional economic activities include handicrafts and textiles, which are sold
and traded at regional fairs. Agriculture exists but to a lesser extent. Some of the communities (i.e.
Olaroz Chico) have traditionally been dedicated to small-scale mining.
Many families have more than one house. They often have a house in the village and a second one in
the countryside where they take care of livestock or develop their subsistence agriculture. Electricity is
obtained from dispersed energy systems (often solar) or from generators, a situation that often imposes
limits on activities. Many young people migrate in search of education or employment opportunities,
often to other areas of the Puna or to the closest cities, i.e. Susques, Abra Pampa, Jujuy or Salta. The
route that connects Susques with the capital city of the province, San Salvador de Jujuy, and the opening
of the Paso de Jama (the route to Chile) have contributed to increased tourist movement in the area
(García Moritán & Cruz, 2012, pp. 165-6), even though few tourists come as far as these communities.
The 10 Atacama communities lie within 50 kilometres from the locations of the Sales de Jujuy
and Minera Exar lithium projects. Even though all 10 communities have established some kind of
relationship with the companies and are affected by their operations to some extent, this study focused
on two communities in particular: Huancar and Pastos Chicos, which lie in the area of direct influence
of Exar and indirect influence of Sales de Jujuy.37 Involving the 10 communities surrounding the
Olaroz-Caucharí salt flat would go beyond the financial and time limitations of this study.
Companies often define their responsibilities in narrow terms according to what is usually called the
“area of direct influence”. This area is determined in the EIA report carried out by the company. As
mentioned, the two communities that are the focus of this study lie within the projects’ areas of direct
influence and, in this case, also coincide with the communities that own the land titles where the projects
are located. These activate certain legal requirements beyond the companies’ voluntary engagement.
It is important to point out that the researchers do not necessarily agree with the companies’ definition
of the “area of direct influence”. Nevertheless, the two communities have been selected as they are
believed to be illustrative of the relevant concepts/dimensions and context that are of interest to this
study – namely, the social and environmental impacts of lithium mining on local communities.
35. Susques, Huancar, Pastos Chicos, Puesto Sey, Catua, Olaroz Chico and San Juan de Quillaques have titles. Coranzuli
and Paso de Jama do not have titles and El Toro is in the process of registering titles.
36. Furthermore, the Susques department has three municipal commissions; the Susques Municipal Commission incorpo-
rating the communities of Susques, Huancar, Pastos Chicos, Sey, Olaroz Chico; the Catua Municipal Commission incorpo-
rating only Catua; and the Coranzuli Municipal Commission incorporating Coranzuli, El Toro, San Juan de Quillaques and
Paso de Jama.
37. We contacted a third community for the investigation (Olaroz Chico), but they decided not to formally participate in the
research.
23 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

5.3.1. Huancar
Huancar community is located in Jujuy Province, 25 km south of Susques at an altitude of 3,600 metres
above sea level. The last official census in 2010 registered a population of 133 people. However, other
sources talk of a population of more than 300 people (Lezcano, 2015). The State recognised them as
an indigenous community and also gave them the communal land titles of the territory where the
community is located.
Traditionally the economic activities in Huancar have been based on livestock and handicrafts, and to a
minor extent, boron mining. However, the arrival of lithium mining impacted on the economic activities
scheme. Today, there are around 35 people with direct and indirect jobs related to mining. The rest of
the community, especially the older generation, is still dedicated to handicrafts and livestock.
The community elects a president, vice-president and a commission for a mandate of two years.
Decisions are made by consensus or if this is not possible, by simple majority, in the monthly assembly.
The Minera Exar project is located in part of Huancar’s communal land and the community is considered
within the direct area of influence. In addition, Sales de Jujuy – whose lithium extraction project is
located outside Huancar’s communal land – has interaction with the community.
5.3.2. Pastos Chicos
Pastos Chicos has a population around 200-250 people. It is located at approximately 4,000 metres
above sea level, 50 km south of Susques. Basic services such as sewage systems, communications and
electricity are limited. The drinking water is brought to the community from outside due to high levels
of arsenic in the groundwater making it unsuitable for consumption.
Traditionally, the main economic activities have been livestock, small-scale agriculture and handicrafts.
However, in the more recent past many of the community members, particularly men, have worked
with the boron mining companies. During the 1990s the closure of the railroad and many mines led
to massive job losses. The few employment opportunities and the lack of secondary education in the
community are seen as the major driver of the migration towards towns and bigger cities.
The community organisation consists of a president, a council and an assembly. The president and the
council are elected every two years. The assembly is the main decision-making body of this indigenous
community, where relevant issues are presented and discussed. It meets monthly and decisions are
taken by a simple majority. The assembly is open to all adults in the community but, according to
community authorities, the participation rate is low.
In the early 2000s the Atacama communities in the Olaroz-Caucharí area started the struggle to (re)gain
their land rights. Today Pastos Chicos is legally recognised and has received legal status as indigenous
peoples together with their communal land titles and the community organisation function. It owns the
land where Exar is located and has relationships with Sales de Jujuy.
6. Company interaction with mining-affected communities
This section describes how the different engagement processes between companies, the State and
communities were carried out. The information is mainly provided anonymously by community members
and complemented with interviews from external actors. It is organised in different sections following
central elements of the free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) rights, in order to assess how the process
was conducted in its inter-phase with the EIA process. Central elements in this process include the
establishment of the engagement process, information and timely access, results in terms of formal
24 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

agreements and expectations, the role of the State and environmental concerns and workers’ needs,
including community perceptions of risks and ambivalence as well as the current stage of the technical
discussion regarding possible environmental impacts.
6.1. Establishment of the engagement process
According to the International Labour Organization Convention no. 169 (ILO C169, 1989) and United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP, 2007) states are required to consult
and cooperate with indigenous peoples concerned, in good faith and through their own representative
institutions “in order to obtain their free, prior and informed consent before adopting and implementing
legislative or administrative measures that may affect them” (UNDRIP 2007, Article 19).
In addition, the OECD recommends that multinational companies should undertake a series of
measures to ensure meaningful stakeholder engagement, in line with the above rights, as they arrive in
a new area. For instance, companies should recognise existing local community authorities and seek to
“[e]ngage with relevant stakeholders in order to provide meaningful opportunities for their views to be
taken into account in relation to planning and decision making for projects or other activities that may
significantly impact local communities” (OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises 2011, General
Policy 14). This requires companies to undertake various activities, such as engaging in dialogues that
will serve different ends, i.e. present the company, the project and policies, devise ways to collaborate
and ultimately, get the community’s approval to operate in the area.
In Argentina, the scope and intensity of the engagement process and relationship established between
companies and local indigenous communities do not solely rely on the companies’ engagement policies
and the communities’ capacities and position, but also on the exact location of the company’s actual
or planned operations. As stipulated in Argentinian law, legal requirements for companies to obtain
communities’ approval enter into force when the project location lies within collectively owned
community land. Hence, the community owning the land is considered to be the rightsholder. However,
it is important to stress that communities located in the area but not owning the land on which company
operations are located could also be affected. This is recognised in international standards, such as FPIC,
as the principle to apply to all peoples possibly affected, whether they have recognised land rights or not.
Exar’s operations are located on land owned by six communities: Huancar, Pastos Chicos, Olaroz Chico,
Puesto Sey, Catua and Susques, while Sales de Jujuy operations are located on Olaroz Chico community
land. In practice, this means the companies are required, by Argentinian law, to get the approval of these
communities for their respective projects. However, international standards and guidelines affect State
and company obligations in relation to people/communities when projects “may affect them” or “may
significantly impact local communities”, regardless of legally recognised ownership of the land.
This means, for example, that Sales de Jujuy only has a formal agreement with Olaroz Chico (land
owner), while also having projects and collaborations with the additional communities based on their
demands in the Olaroz-Caucharí area (Huancar, Pastos Chicos, Puesto Sey, Catua, Paso de Jama, San
Juan de Quillaques, Coranzuli, El Toro and Susques). Exar has formal agreements with six communities:
Catua, Susques, Puesto Sey, Olaroz Chico and Pastos Chicos (Frankel and Whoriskey 2016).
The mentioned collaborations consist of a wide range of investments and donations. Investments have
been carried out in terms of infrastructure, healthcare and education, i.e. Sales de Jujuy provided internet
access for the school in Susques community, donated an ambulance to the hospital, gave micro-loans
to local entrepreneurs, while Minera Exar repaired the roof on the school building in Huancar, built a
new community centre in Pastos Chicos etc. Companies have also provided community libraries, internet
access, computers and printers for community centres, construction material and dry-cleaning services
as well as more short-term monetary donations to communal activities and feasts for food and drinks.
25 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

For Pastos Chicos the relationship with Minera Exar began in 2009 when the company made contact and
started visiting the community assemblies. The first meetings are described as frequent and informative.
The company informed the community about the existence of lithium, the extraction process and their
plans. Moreover, the meetings included the discussion and explanation of the environmental impact
assessment (EIA) report.
Even if Sales the Jujuy was the first company to establish in the area and work with the different
communities, for Huancar the contact with Minera Exar felt as the first contact with a lithium company.
This may be to the fact that this company was the first directly on their land. Although members do not
recall the exact date of the first contact, they mention it was during a community assembly in which
company representatives came and informed them about the project. The interaction was described
by community members as more frequent at the beginning when the project needed their approval:
company representatives attended the community assemblies once a month; they explained the
different phases of the project and sought a closer relationship with the community. Later on, after
that the community granted their approval, the meetings have been held less frequently – every two or
three months. This could obey to the fact that interactions occur rather on a project-basis.
Community members’ testimonies pointed out that the companies approached Pastos Chicos and
Huancar communities after having the provincial government approval, and that Minera Exar
found communities with unemployment, economic and educational difficulties at the moment of
the first contact.
Sales de Jujuy is the company with the longest presence in the area, and employs people from the
different communities based on an agreed quota system that was defined and agreed by all communities.
As mentioned above, Sales de Jujuy only has a formal agreement with Olaroz Chico and has a more
limited and informal relationship with the other communities. This might explain the opinion many
community members have about Sales de Jujuy, in Huancar and Pastos Chicos, as not that helpful or
accessible because they “only work with Olaroz Chico”. With Olaroz Chico the company has a different
relationship. They have a regulated agreement and Sales de Jujuy collaborates with them on different
aspects such as building a new secondary school, providing internet access for the community and
giving donations for local celebrations. Additionally, almost all men in the community work in a direct
or indirect way at Sales de Jujuy. There is a close relationship in which the company has a provider role.
Regarding the engagement and community member participation, companies respect the communal
organisation. They initiated contacts with the representatives of the community with whom they have
more frequent interaction, generally the president or community council, which is very much the liaison
between the company and the community assembly. The main gatherings occur in the community
assemblies, which are the main decision-making space of the communities. And this space has also
become the centre of the company-community relationship. The main objective of these meetings is
to provide information, explain the projects and answer questions, as well as to hear proposals and
needs, and negotiate the approval of the projects. After negotiations take place, the company gets the
approval of the different stages in the EIA process and the communities, depending on their position,
achieve some economic or material collaboration.
Even if these engagement processes take place in the community assemblies, which are once a month
and are open to all community members older than 18 years, this does not mean that all community
members participate. Thus, there are many members who are not aware of the projects or implications.
Also, even if community members do participate in assemblies, sometimes they do not know the details
of the meetings sufficiently in advance and do not feel prepared to fully engage in discussions. Although
meetings were held frequently, particularly at the beginning of the process, it is not clear whether the
whole process, including its timeframe and different phases, was planned and agreed with community
members and/or community authorities. This clearly casts doubt over whether sufficient time was
provided in order for community members to engage meaningfully. As OECD guidelines clearly state,
26 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

stakeholders should have sufficient time to understand the information provided, have time to consider
it, as well as have time to get internally organised.
From community members’ descriptions of the engagement process and relationship to companies,
doubts arise as to whether these processes of engagement, taking the form of meetings and
consultations in the community assemblies, fulfill the criteria as outlined in the OECD guidelines to
the extractive sector when it comes to stakeholder engagement. Communication seems to have been
one-sided rather than between two parties that can freely express their opinions with the common
objective to reach mutual understanding. In addition, the process described does not seem to have
involved or asked communities how they would like to design engagement activities. Furthermore,
companies’ honesty and “good faith” could be discussed, as community members explain how company
representatives repeatedly assured them the mining project would not affect water resources in
the area, a topic that is surrounded by great uncertainties (see section 6.5). It seems unlikely that
companies would be unaware of the existing technical discussions around environmental impacts. The
fact that meetings are held less frequently after the community has given approval also suggests this
engagement might have been a company strategy to get community approval with less concern for
listening to and incorporating community views and concerns about the project.
In summary, the assessment of the engagement process shows there are breaches in the way the
companies have complied with international standards, provisions and guidelines when engaging
and building relationships with the two communities owning land where they wished to locate their
projects, as well as with the additional eight communities in the area.
6.2. Information and timely access
Most of the initial interactions between companies and communities centre on the EIA report, in which
information about the different environmental dimensions is crucial. It is particularly important during
this phase of the process that all relevant information is disclosed in a transparent way and in a way
that assures timely access for communities.
The environmental impact study should include baseline information on the biodiversity, the wetlands
and the water system of the watershed in the area. It should also integrate the description of the process
that will be used to extract lithium, its consequences and the minimisation or mitigation strategies.
However, it is important to note that this study is done by a consultant hired by the company that has
a vested interest in that the study gets approved both by provincial authorities and communities. All
information considered in the engagement process is provided by the company, which shares copies
of different studies and reports, done by the company itself, to communities. The community council
generally keeps the documentation in case community members want to access it or consult on some
issues at a different time. One community member, referring to the EIA report, stated: “It is there and
whoever wants to read it can read it; but it is too long and difficult to understand”38 (Interviewee 26).
In Huancar community, members mentioned that the presentations and explanations about lithium
extraction, the proposed project and its environmental impacts, the job opportunities and economic
benefits were also included. For some interviewees, it was clear that the company wanted to highlight
the economic benefits and jobs while denying or minimising any possible environmental impacts.
Particularly regarding environmental concerns, one interviewee stated: “They [company representatives]
did not report about water, environment or health impacts. They only say that they do not pollute and
when you ask them, they do not even answer what they do to avoid pollution. But, in the cattle ranches
38. “Están acá y el que quiera puede leerla [la información de impacto ambiental], pero es muy largo y muy difícil de
entender.”
27 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

there are young animals that die; to me that means they pollute”39 (Interviewee 24). This has serious
implications, as the lack of transparency and withholding of information prevent community members
from engaging with companies in a fully informed manner, and hence, they will not be able to contribute
their perspectives or defend their interests. As such, this may result in decisions being made without
having taken into account and considered important possible impacts.
Both Pastos Chicos and Huancar communities are aware that their main source of information is the
company itself and they have not developed connections to external actors; i.e. Huancar highlighted
they could only access the experts and technicians linked to the company. Almost all the interviewees
have, in different ways, referred to the fact that they did not understand the information provided.
They explained that the information provided was too technical and too lengthy to understand. One
community member explains that: “They [company representatives] do not explain properly, they
send their technicians, but we do not understand. We make questions, but their answers are always
technical. Whoever says they understand, I don’t believe it”40 (Interviewee 36). In addition, community
members in Pastos Chicos highlighted that they were never asked which format they would like to
receive the information (i.e. presentations, written materials, pictures, visuals). In the communities,
members also pointed out that the company representatives and technicians were open to questions,
but that the answers were still difficult to understand; some interviews highlighted that the answers
were given quickly, and often orally and still in a very technical manner. This made many of them
to refrain from asking further questions. It was also stressed that the difficulty of understanding the
information provided has hindered them from asking questions in the first place as they did not know,
or did not understand, what to ask.
TABLE 1: Interviewees and their understanding
of the information provided by the mining companies
How many interviewees How many interviewees How many interviewees
expressed the were not consulted did not receive
information provided by the companies information directly
by the companies was about how they from the mining
too technical and/or too wanted to receive the companies?
lengthy? information?
83.33% 85.29% 29.41%
These community testimonies in relation to information and timely access clearly show insufficiencies
in the engagement process where neither timeframes nor the information provided can be considered
sufficient. As the informed requirement implies in the principle of FPIC, the information should be given
in such a way that community members understand, so they can make an informed decision. Further,
the aspect of informed shows how companies’ have had complete power over what information, and in
39. “No informaron sobre el agua, el ambiente ni la salud. Dicen que no contaminan y ya, cuando preguntas, ni dicen
que hacen para no contaminar, pero en las haciendas hay animales jóvenes que se mueren, así que para mí sí con-
taminan.”
40. “Pero no explican bien, mandan técnicos y no se entiende. Se hacen preguntas pero te dan respuestas técnicas.
Para mí el que dice que entiende no es verdad.”
28 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

what way the information is shared with communities. Also, as shown above, companies have not shared
the foreseeable risks factors and potential environmental impacts that could affect the communities. It
is thus questionable whether community decisions have been made in an informed manner.
6.3. Results of the exchange: agreements and expectations
Generally, when communities and companies reach an understanding, there is an agreement signed
between them as communities decide to grant their approval of the EIA report in exchange for certain
terms and conditions included in the agreement regulating the relationship.41 To the knowledge of this
study, there were no offerings or benefits for community members to be part of the meetings or to support
the mining activity.
This research has not accessed the agreements between communities and companies as community
authorities did not wish to disclose these details. However, various interviewees in the communities
have informed and commented on some of the content. Central to the agreements seem to be that
companies will employ some of the communities’ members, training of community members through
workshops, and economic compensation (a fixed amount per year). Even though this research does
not know the exact amount of economic compensation, a Washington Post article from December
2016 revealed Minera Exar’s yearly compensation to six of the communities in the area. Compensation
to Pastos Chicos was around US$ 59,000 and around US$ 25,000 to Huancar (Frankel and Whoriskey
2016).42 Nevertheless, when talking to community members not everyone was aware of the existence
of an agreement for economic compensation and how the money is distributed around the community
still remains unclear.
Moreover, when trying to understand how the conditions were decided, a community member informed
that: “The employment of the local population was proposed by the company and the capacitation
workshops was something we requested. Minera Exar proposed the amount of the yearly economic
compensation, it was discussed in the assembly and we asked for a little more. It is for the community and
per year”43 (Interviewee 11). Also, in addition to the formal agreement, as mentioned above, communities
ask for economic collaborations for special activities or needs. The collaborations entail a wide range of
investments and were mostly aimed at satisfying demands for services rather than rights.
6.3.1. Perceptions and understanding regarding power asymmetry
Community members are very much aware of the power asymmetries during negotiations of
agreements with companies. One community member explains: “(...) A weak point is that we do not
have jobs, and the one in need is always weak, our education is not in line with the time in which we
live”44 (Interviewee 27). Specifically, in Huancar, there is awareness that they have approved Minera
Exar project and accepted the amount of money offered by the company due to lack of awareness.
This reflects the importance of government involvement and external actor participation in order to
support the communities in their relationship with companies.
41. Although the public authorities must approve the EIA, the companies pretend to demonstrate local communities’ par-
ticipation and support, by the mentioned agreements.
42. The other four communities were Catua around US$ 9,000, Susques around US 12,000, Puesto Sey around US$
25,000, and Olaroz Chico around US$ 47,000. For a deeper understanding of the compensation amounts and the eco-
nomic representation for the company, we should consider that although Minera Exar has not started its exploitation
phase, its net assets are US$ 38,917 million (Lithium American Corp., 2017).
43. “(…) La contratación de población local lo propuso la empresa, las capacitaciones las pedimos nosotros. El monto de
dinero lo propuso Exar, se lo habló en asamblea y pedimos un poco más. Es para la comunidad, por año. (…)”.
44. “(…). Un punto débil es que no tenemos trabajo y el que necesita siempre es débil, la educación no está acorde al
tiempo en que vivimos.”.
29 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

6.3.2. Perceptions and understanding regarding the company’s good faith
Community members have different opinions on whether the companies are acting in “good faith” or
not, that is, taking community perspectives into account. Some genuinely believe the company cares
for the community while others believe they are only acting in their own interest and wanted to get the
community’s approval as quickly as possible. Nevertheless, the technical character of the information
provided and its lack of impartiality raise serious concerns as to whether the company actually has
acted in line with provisions and guidelines regarding disclosure and transparency of information and
“good faith”.
6.3.3. Possibilities of renegotiation
After the agreements were set between communities and companies, the relationship continues, and
the frequency and type of contact varies from community to community and company to company. For
example, Pastos Chicos meets with Exar every three month in the community, while Huancar does so
every two or three months. Sales de Jujuy is already working in different projects, in another form that
does not have the format of a “meeting”.
While almost all community members in Pastos Chicos feel they can freely express their opinion in the
different meetings, some find this can be done as long as it does not involve seeking renegotiation or
withdrawal of their consent.
Some believe they have the possibility to renegotiate and to achieve higher economic compensation
when Minera Exar goes from construction into the production stage (although the first step of the
production stage was done on November 2018, when the first production pond was opened, Minera Exar
expect to start selling lithium in 2020). On the contrary, some community members express a feeling
of resignation and believe they cannot do anything to change the situation now that the companies
are here and can do whatever they want. Others say they do not know if or how the agreement could
be changed as they do not know the details of it. The last position, brought up by a few community
members, is that they believe their consent does not matter in the end as the subsoil resources belong
to the State.
For some community members in Pastos Chicos and Huancar, the mining company is not fulfilling all
the points of the contract, especially the point related to employment opportunities for them. However,
the community members accepted they do not know all the details of this.45 In contrast, the community
leaders pointed out that the company is fulfilling the agreement.
Currently, the community members interested in the relationship between the lithium companies
and the community presents two points of view: those focusing on mining employment opportunities
tend to support the companies’ projects; whereas, those whose main concern is the lithium extraction
impacts on the environment in the near future have a negative view of the extraction activity. Thus, their
expectations for the near future differs depending on their point of view – focus on the employment or
on the environment impacts.
Community leaders’ expectations mix these two views. They have pointed out that a new agreement
should be negotiated and signed for the exploitation phase and hope that Huancar and Pastos Chicos
could get a better contract with more employment opportunities and economic benefits, and with
more control over Exar activities to avoid large negative impacts over the environment.
45. As previously mentioned, the two communities have an assembly which is the main decision-making body and where
the topics related with the lithium companies are discussed. Because of participation in the assemblies is not mandatory,
those community members that do not attend frequently have less information about the agreements.
30 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Besides not having an agreement with Sales de Jujuy, Huancar community has an ongoing relation with
this company too. There are two points in this relation: the direct and indirect employment created
through Sales de Jujuy project; and the expectation to sign a contract with the mining company.
Regarding the relationship with Sales de Jujuy there is an expectation that the presidents of the 10
communities will work out a shared agreement for all the communities asking for different levels of
economic benefits and employment opportunities depending on the location of each community, the
project area of influence and its potential environmental impacts on the community land. Despite this
initiative actively coordinated by the local communities, at the time of this report, Sales de Jujuy has
not yet signs an agreement with them.
6.4. The role of the State
As mentioned in section three, the responsibility of implementing the free, prior and informed consent
(FPIC) process to guarantee the participation rights is a responsibility of the State that cannot be
transferred or delegated to a third party. However, when analysing the interactions between companies
and communities in this research, a salient aspect is the absence of State representatives throughout
the whole engagement process. No government representatives were part of the meetings that Minera
Exar representatives had with Huancar. The same situation is portrayed for Pastos Chicos.
Some Huancar community members have shown their concern and pointed out that, although they
had asked the local and provincial government for a meeting on the matter, they did not get a positive
response so far. When they were asked about State involvement in the process, an interviewee
explained that the State were “Not in the meetings, neither municipal nor provincial [representatives]…
”46 (Interviewee 28).
In Pastos Chicos the situation was similar: there was no presence or participation of provincial
representatives during the meetings with the companies in the community. However, provincial
authorities were sometimes present in the meetings that were held in Susques or Jujuy in which the
community leadership participated together with the other community leaders. Even though it is
difficult to know how this was done in detail, and it remains unclear what exact role the provincial
authorities played during these meetings, it appears they mainly concerned the EIA report. At this
stage of the process Pastos Chicos also had brief contact with a lawyer. When asked about how they
came into contact with this lawyer the community said that he was on a list of lawyers provided by the
company. Some say the lawyer informed them of their rights as indigenous peoples while others say it
was of no help and that he was on the company’s side.
From a rights-based approach, the lack of State presence during the meetings with the companies’
representatives in the communities is worrisome as the FPIC principle clearly states that the
responsibility to secure community consent belongs to the state and that this responsibility cannot
be delegated to a private party. The absence of state representatives at the meetings has also been
reclaimed by community members who believe the state should participate more, investigate and
guarantee their rights. One interviewee from Pastos Chicos said: “[We] asked for meetings with the
Direction of Water Resources to get to know more about the water consumption of the companies but
they never answered”47 (Interviewee 11).
Moreover, the particular existence of the UGAMP, despite devising a place for a community
representative to participate in multi-stakeholder dialogues to discuss the environmental impacts
46. “En las reuniones no, ni municipal ni provincial.”
47. “Les pedimos reuniones a Recursos Hídricos para saber sobre el agua que van a usar las empresas pero no me
respondieron.”
31 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

of the project within the mining agency, does not fulfill the participation and consultation rights for
some important reasons: the member is not representing the community as it does not involve the
community’s main governing body, the community assembly, as per their own statutes have defined
to make decisions; it does not involve a process culturally adequate agreed with the communities as
meetings are held and organised in the state agency, according to bureaucratic definitions (in the
capital city, within week days and working times).
The lack of intervention of State representatives can also be seen in the activities devised to monitor
ongoing operations once approved. Community members in the two communities have participated
in the three-monthly participatory monitoring organised by Sales de Jujuy, as part of a commitment
the company took in the EIA approval process.48 Communities send two representatives to the five-
day monitoring activities, which are voluntary, and no compensation is given in return. Although the
monitoring is considered an interesting activity, in practice it has many shortcomings. Few members
of the community are able to participate as they would lose five days of work. Moreover, the technical
level is high during the monitoring activities making it difficult to follow and understand the findings
and discussions. Communities’ members visit the plant and area of influence, and indicators of
water level and air pollution are shown by experts. Although it is an unpaid activity and the mining
companies only cover food and transportation expenses, Huancar community tried to send the same
representatives each time as a strategy to be able to compare from one visit to the other and also try
to develop increased knowledge of the situation.
This form of community participation in monitoring activities shows the same shortcomings as during
the engagement process. Engagement is one-sided and designed without incorporating community
perspectives or necessities of how and when such monitoring activities should occur. Further, the
technical level is still high, preventing community members from forming a proper understanding of
the purpose, result and outcome of such activities. Further, the local community Olaroz Chico has asked
for the participation of the Direction of Water Resources in the monitoring process. The Direction of
Water Resources started to participate in UGAMP since 2017 but only visits the area once a year, what
is considered insufficient by community members who want more State control over the monitoring
process of potential environmental impacts on the water resources in the area.
6.5. Environmental concerns
6.5.1. Community perception of risks and ambivalence
The environmental impact of lithium extraction is an issue that cut across the different interviews,
showing diverse degrees of concern or worry. While there is a group of community members that is
concerned with environmental issues, in which water availability and the possible shortcomings in
the future are at the centre,49 others minimise the issue as it is perceived as the price to pay to get the
economic benefits that the companies are offering (i.e. employment opportunities).
Particularly in Pastos Chicos, some community members said they have noticed lower water levels in
the area. However, they also mention this could be due to the drought or climate change impacts, which
also is the explanation the company has given to some of the community members when they have
asked about the issue. When asked about environmental impacts, no concern besides the water issue is
brought up during the interviews and community members do not express an urgent concern. However,
a worry for future generations and doubts about what will happen in 30-40 years appears in some
48. As a condition to its EIA, as approved by the provincial government, Sales de Jujuy have to conduct a quarterly partic-
ipatory monitoring.
49. Regarding community members’ concern about water availability in the future, Lithium Americas Corp. NI 43–101
Technical Report (January 2018) projected pumped 49,344,735 cubic meters of brine during the first five years of Minera
Exar project, and probable it will pump 403,780,773 cubic meters of brine during a period of forty years of activity.
32 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

conversations. Even though the company has assured the community there are no risks associated with
their activity not all community members believe they are telling the truth. Environmental concerns
persist and many mention they would like more information about the environmental situation and
the potential risks.
In Huancar, interviewees pointed out that, since the companies’ arrival, there were dubious livestock
deaths, less grass and reduced water availability: “The water is already worse, there is every time less;
sometimes it is even yellow or green”50 (Interviewee 32). Many community members believe lithium
mining is affecting the environment. In addition, a worker of Sales de Jujuy plant saw spills: “Last week
there was a spill from a chemical truck, when it was arriving to the Sales plant, and we were forbidden
to pass through there. If we passed through, it had to be in a van and with the car windows up. A
technician explained that if that liquid touched the water, it would evaporate and contaminate the
air. They said they were going to throw a powder on it and it would get out of there”51 (Interviewee 36).
For other community members, the relevant issue about the company’s arrival is the economic impact
of their presence in the area. In particular, the employment opportunities, both direct and indirect,
are highly valued in a context of lack of other job options. It also represents access to other benefits
such as healthcare insurance – it is a benefit that traditional economic activities such as livestock and
agriculture do not offer – and education – e.g. although public education depends on the State, in
Huancar high school education started to be given after building the local high school with Minera
Exar’s economic assistance. Interviews have pointed out that having a high-school in the community
has helped reverse emigration to bigger villages or cities and has made people come back to live in
the community.
Similarly, in Pastos Chicos, some community members have a more positive position regarding mining
companies than others, a position mainly centred on employment opportunities. Nevertheless, most
of the community members are in favour of the mining activities and there has not been much a
conflict or disagreements regarding the issue. The minor tensions have mainly originated from who
gets employment and who does not, and some interviewees insinuated they believe the community
authorities sometimes act in their own interest. Also, a changing social aspect brought up as a problem
relates to the high alcohol consumption both among younger boys and the men working at the
companies during their week off from work (Sales de Jujuy and Minera Exar have a rotating system of
work, in which employees work during seven days in a row, and then they have seven days off in a row).
At the same time many point out they feel the companies are taking away more than they are giving
back. Some point out that not everyone gets employed by the company and that there is still no
secondary school in Pastos Chicos and that people still migrate. A person working in the community
believes that little has changed for the better: “These communities are completely forgotten. Now
with the lithium some have work and stay in the community, but the same needs remain. Nothing is
solved here, there are not even proper bathrooms, there are still latrines here”52 (Interviewee 17). At
present, the community authorities in Pastos Chicos state that 15 people are employed at Minera Exar,
13 at Sales de Jujuy and 4 at South American Salars. However, what type of contract and the terms of
employment they work under are still unclear. Also, in comparison to previously, more women are now
working in relation to the mining companies, but nevertheless, the majority are still at home dedicated
to the children or traditional activities such as handicrafts.
50. “El agua ya empeoró, cada vez hay menos y a veces sale amarilla o verde”.
51. “La semana pasada hubo un derrame de un camión químico, cuando estaba llegando a la planta de Sales, y nos
prohibieron pasar por ahí. Si pasábamos tenía que ser en camioneta y con los vidrios altos. Un técnico nos explicó que
si ese líquido llegaba a tocar el agua, se iba a evaporar y contaminar el aire. Dijeron que iban a tirarle un polvo y sacarlo
de ahí.”
52. “Estos pueblos están sumergidos en el olvido. Ahora con esto del litio, algunos tienen trabajo y se quedan, pero
sigue habiendo las mismas necesidades. Acá nada se soluciona, ni baños de primera hay, se sigue con letrinas.”
33 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Even though many community members are in favour of the mining activities, they simultaneously
express ambivalence towards the companies and their activities. The positive aspect of employment
opportunities mixes with environmental concerns and questions whether the compensation the
community gets is enough and what actually ought to correspond to them considering the great
economic gains of the companies (Orocobre – member of the holding company Sales de Jujuy -
declared a sales revenue of US$ 32 million during the last quarter of 2018). One young community
member reflects on these issues by saying that: “on the one hand it is bad because they take everything
away from here and there are few benefits for the community, but on the other hand it is good because
it gives us work”53 (Interviewee 18). The ambivalence felt by many community members raises the
question about what the community would have preferred if there existed other forms of employment
opportunities at the time of the mining companies’ arrival.
This ambivalence can also be seen in some of the following quotes:
“[The mines] provide work but it is temporary, and I do not think it is as pure as they say. Lithium
may be necessary, lead to a change, but I do not believe that the riches that are extracted remain in
the province... it all goes abroad. At the mine El Aguilar, there were foreigners who took everything
abroad. I do not think this is very different. If it stayed in the country it would be different. This is [what
companies are doing] taking advantage of the people of the Puna. There should be battery factories
here that could change the reality for these people”54 (Interviewee 17).
“I approve it due to the needs of the community, because the company channels many needs, mainly
the jobs; but we know that they use a lot of water55 and they pollute. Those of us who work in mining
companies see it, we see the amount of water they use and the pollution”.56 And “The community
approves mining because of the jobs, before there were no jobs and people used to leave the community,
families got separated because of that, the children left to study because we did not have a high school,
and it used to be very difficult. With mining there are jobs and we can address many needs, for example
[before mining companies arrives] people did not know what the health insurance was and now they
know, doctors can examine them”57 (Interviewee 28).
“I was raised by my parents spinning and weaving, and I still studied. To say that we need the mining
companies is a lie, because the community is the same, it does not grow. I’m worried about the
environment and the diseases. We will end up like Abra Pampa.”58 59 (Interviewee 32).
53. “Por una parte todo mal porque se llevan todo de acá y queda poco beneficio para la comunidad, después es buena
[la opinión sobre la minería en la zona] porque nos da trabajo.”
54. “Da trabajo pero es momentáneo, no creo que sea tan puro como dicen. Puede ser necesario el litio, llevar a un cambio,
pero no creo que las riquezas que sacan queden en la provincia… se lo llevan al exterior. En mina El Aguilar eran extran-
jeros que se llevaron todo al exterior, no creo que esto sea muy distinto. Si quedara en el país sería diferente. Esto es
aprovecharse de la gente de la puna, que haya fábricas de baterías para cambiar la realidad de esta gente.”
55. Lithium Americas Corp. NI 43 – 101 Technical Report (January 2018) projected pumped 49,344,735 cubic metres of
water brine during the first five years of Minera Exar project, and probably it will pump 403,780,773 cubic metres of brine
during a period of 40 years of activity.
56. “Apruebo por las necesidades de la comunidad, porque por la empresa se canalizan muchas necesidades, princi-
palmente el trabajo; pero sabemos que usan muchísima agua y que contaminan. Los que trabajamos en las mineras
lo vemos, vemos la cantidad de agua que usan y la contaminación.”
57. “La comunidad aprueba la minería por el trabajo, porque antes no había trabajo y la gente se iba, las familias se
separaban por eso, los hijos se iban a estudiar porque no teníamos secundario y era muy difícil. Con la minería hay
trabajo y canalizamos muchas necesidades, por ejemplo la gente no sabía lo que era una obra social y ahora saben,
pueden verlos los médicos.”
58. Abra Pampa is a town located in Jujuy Province and it has 10,000 residents. The metal smelter company Metal Huasi oper-
ated there. It closed in the 1980s leaving behind 15,000 tonnes of waste. In 2007, the University of Jujuy pointed out that more
than the 80 per cent of the child population contained lead values in amounts detrimental to health. In addition, the Ministry of
Health of Jujuy admitted that at least 10 per cent of the adult population had “critical levels” of lead in their blood.
59. “A mí me criaron mis padres hilando y tejiendo, e igual estudie. Decir que se necesita a las mineras es mentira,
porque la comunidad está igual no crece. Me preocupa el ambiente y las enfermedades. Vamos a terminar igual que
Abra Pampa. (…).”
34 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

6.5.2. Environmental concerns
In recent years, salt flats have become the focus of world attention after it was discovered that
lithium could be found in its brine waters. Salt flats are found in very arid regions with limited annual
precipitation. However, water is still present in limited quantities as a mixture of brine and fresh water.
Experts have identified crucial information gaps that hinder the proper and substantial analysis of
impacts of lithium extraction. This section will give an overview of the main discussions related to how
watersheds where the salt flats are located should be understood and studied in order to avoid critical
impacts on water sources.
Aquifers found at a salt flat include a shallow upper aquifer with an intermediate unit that forms a
confined lower aquifer (Acosta et al, 2008). That lower aquifer is held in by a lower ignimbrite unit,
followed by a harder surface underneath that (Acosta et al, 2008). Both salt and freshwater aquifers
exist under a salt lake, often separate because of differences in density (Holzbecher, 2005). Marazuela
et al adds that, “the contact between two miscible fluids of different densities (salt and freshwater) is
characterized by a mixing zone, which is also called a saline interface. This interface results from the
dynamic equilibrium of moving fresh-and saltwater” (Marazuela et al, 2018).
FIGURE 5: SALT FLAT BASIN.
RECHARGE
OF WATER
(Rain)
WATER DISCHARGE
(Evaporation)
SALAR
Aluvial
fan
IMPERMEABLE
SALINASL AGYERRA NDES
(Clay)
FRESHWATER FRESHWATER
BRINE
(Groundwater
with lithim)
HYDROGEOLOGICAL BASE
Source: Own elaboration based on Sticco, 2018.
35 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

FIGURE 6: ARCHIBARCA AQUIFER, OLAROZ-CAUCHARÍ WATERSHED.
FRESHWATER
MIXED WATER
BRACKISH WATER
Source: Sticco, 2018.
Duffy asserts that because the “water table is near the surface of the playa, a continuous supply of
dissolved salts is maintained and available for evaporation” (Duffy, C., 1988). This is what creates
the accumulation of salts on the surface of the basin. Damaging the saline interface could cause a
mixing of salt and freshwater aquifer and could lead to salinisation of freshwater sources in the area
(Holzbecher, 2005).
Maria Victoria Dente et al describe the common characteristics of basins of la Puna region, northern
Argentina. The salt flats and lagunas found in this region act as receptacles to the rivers that flow down
from higher elevations. Most of these rivers are temporary and form during the rainy season (Dente et
al). Direct rainfall and lateral inflow from these temporary rivers comprise the only water input to the
salt flat system because of the aridity of the climate (Marazuela et al, 2018).
Because aquifers found at salt flats recharge by rainfall and the only natural discharge is through
evaporation, salt flat basins are greatly affected by recharge reduction or discharge increase (Acosta et
al, 2008). Acosta asserts that a “recharge reduction can be caused by an increase in freshwater extraction
rates in upstream aquifers”, and a “discharge increase can be caused by higher rates of brine extraction
in downstream aquifers near the salt flat nucleus” (Acosta et al, 2008). These changes in water quantities
could have a profound effect on the salt flat ecosystem, affecting the flora and fauna, which also impacts
on agriculture and livestock activities in surrounding areas. In addition, by breaking the hydrological
balance, the fresh water of the aquifers could become salinised (Sticco, 2018; Holzbecher, 2005).
Regarding the connection between different water basins through the groundwater aquifers, research
has found different information. While Marazuela et al did assert that rainfall is the only input to the
salt flat system, the author mentioned that water basins could be linked through groundwater aquifers
(Marazuela et al, 2018). Sieland understands that all sub-basins are interconnected with each other:
conflicting with Wolf, who proposed independent hydrologic systems (2002).
36 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

C. Ortiz et al conducted a study on the sources of water for the Salar de Atacama basin to see if
discharge increases caused by brine extraction had an effect on the ecologically rich lagoons located
within the basin system. While he did not find a direct effect, Ortiz did note that there are many aquifers
around a salt flat that could be providing fresh water (Ortiz, C. et al, 2014). In a similar study of a salt
basin located in the Trans-Pecos region of West Texas, where water discharge was primarily through
pumping, Angle found that, “because of the low recharge rates, water pumped from these aquifers will
cause substantial water level declines” (Angle, 2003). Depleting one aquifer could affect the aquifers
around it and could potentially affect the freshwater flow to the salt flat. Because there is almost
always a deficit of water entering the system, there is no telling the effect that increased discharge
could have on the entire ecosystem in the long term.
These findings, applied to different basins in diverse regions highlight the need to thoroughly study the
hydrological systems in these arid regions and to understand the possible connection between water
basins, their sub-units and the aquifers supplying them.
Hence, a number of concerns and questions have risen in the particular case studied.
First, a 2018 study conducted by Sticco and Damiani, from UCA – Catholic University of Argentina, in
which they have updated the initial study by Mecconi and Sticco (2012) on the hydrological balance of
the studied watershed of Olaroz-Cuachari brought alarming findings. Using the information provided
by the companies themselves, the study – conducted using modelling systems – has calculated the
relationship between water use (discharge) and water supply (recharge). It found a negative trend and
impact in the studied case, suggesting the need to change existing exploiting techniques to ensure that
the water that leaves the system is the same as the water that comes in.
Second, additional information points to the situation of wetlands, which are key units in the Punean
ecosystem including rivers, lakes, lagoons, salts and vegas or peatbog. The value of these ecosystem
centres is that they contribute to primary productivity, maintain vertebrate populations and biodiversity,
and regulate hydrological resources (Izquierdo et al, 2017).
Moreover, the need and urgency to design and promote strategies for the conservation of the Punean
wetlands, considering the potential threats arising from climate change and land use, particularly
mining and tourism, is highlighted as a priority.
For experts in studying the wetlands, it is central to have the right baseline study to understand how
ecosystems have been functioning and how they could be potentially impacted by mining activity. This
baseline needs to include particularities of the ecosystems and techniques used and not to merely
repeat the type of information used for other mining projects and areas (Interview Izquierdo).
This is a point that many experts share. Patricia Marconi and Amelia Clark, experts in the study of
Andean flamingos, an endemic species in the area that inhabits the salt-flats at particular times of
the year, have also founds serious defects in the environmental information and analysis used to
understand environmental impacts. The reports that the companies provide lack serious hydrological
understanding as well as an ecosystem approach (Marconi et al, 2018).
Last but not least, for the National Ombudsman’s Office, which has been undertaking research on the
institutional capacity of provincial agencies, seeking to understand what kind of information is needed to
analyse impacts in the hydrological system, and to what point this information is available for decision-
makers, the message is clear: neither provincial nor national authorities have conducted hydrological studies,
or carried out superficial or underground water monitoring. In addition, they have not identified areas in
which salt and fresh water co-exist, nor have they calculated the hydrological balance of the watersheds in
the area. The only information available is that provided by companies and there is no baseline that can be
used as a reference to identify eventual modifications in the environment (De Francesco, 2018).
37 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

All these elements point to an alarming situation. Government agencies are not in possession of the
information they need to decide and analyse environmental impacts. Experts suggest some additional
and specific studies need to be conducted, but this is not happening and instead, projects are gaining
approval with little critical review. This means that the concerns of communities about the water
resources are not being adequately addressed by government authorities.
7. Main problems with the FPIC process
When analysing the community-company engagement, relationship and process from a rights-based
approach, considering the requirements of the free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) principle, the
case studied has identified three main problems.
First, it is clear that there is significant power asymmetry characterising the entire relationship between
companies and communities. The socio-economic situation of the communities – which have limited
basic services and very few employment opportunities – stands in sharp contrast to the wealthy multi-
and transnational companies. This has put communities in an unequal position vis-à-vis companies
and, to a large extent, has shaped communities’ capacities, available options and expectations when
engaging in exchanges and negotiations. In these circumstances, it is particularly important that the
State plays its role and takes its responsibility for organising and conducting the FPIC process, ensuring
that all requirements are followed and respected.
In the case studied here it is clear that the provincial authorities of Jujuy have neglected this
responsibility. Companies have been allowed to approach and interact with communities without
involvement from any State actor or other impartial third party. Thus, it was possible for companies,
with considerable economic resources and elaborated corporate strategies, to approach communities
without supervision or participation from the State when interacting and negotiating terms and
conditions to achieve communities’ consent and social legitimacy.
Second, in the absence of an impartial State agency, companies have been able to take advantage of
their superior position in relation to communities. This is evident particularly when examining the crucial
aspect of information. Due to provincial and national authorities’ lack of critical information, companies
have a dominant position and exert full control over what information is available to communities and
what is considered in the EIA procedure. Regarding the provision and explanation of information, this
research has revealed that companies have not been fully transparent – taking into account the lack
of information about possible environmental impacts and the remaining uncertainties in the technical
discussion regarding environmental impacts. In that way, they have denied the communities access to
a broader debate. This is a clear violation of the informed requirement and, as a consequence, this has
prevented communities from making fully informed decisions.
Third, in relation to the information aspect, the general absence of the State throughout the process is
evident, both as the party responsible for conducting the FPIC process, and as an information provider
and guarantor of the impartiality of the information provided by companies. Examining the information
aspect has shown not only how the relatively stronger position of companies affects communities’
right to information, but also how there seems to be an asymmetry between provincial authorities and
companies when it comes to information and the capacity to evaluate it. With this in mind, the National
Ombudsman has expressed concerns about the lack of baseline information among provincial and
federal authorities, which casts doubts over whether government authorities have the sufficient and
necessary capacity to correctly evaluate a company’s EIA report and to monitor its activities (Interview,
De Francesco, 2017).
This situation is alarming for various reasons: one being that companies themselves have control
over and determine the area of direct influence, and thus, exert power over the communities that are
38 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

right-holders in relation to each project. From a different point of view, the area of influence could be
determined by considering the studies that understand the unity of hydrological system. This could
potentially involve the communities living in the whole watershed, which would lead to a different set
of negotiations, focusing more on the collective rather the single community’s need.
Lastly, the uncritical attitude from the provincial authorities regarding mining companies’ dominant
position as information providers fails to acknowledge that company agendas might not coincide with
the State’s responsibility to guarantee that FPIC requirements are followed and respected.
8. Closing remarks
This research had the aim of investigating the social and environmental dimensions involved in lithium
extraction in Argentina by focusing on a case study in Jujuy Province, one of the three provinces with
substantive lithium reserves in the country.
Through analysing the different engagement relationships in two different communities in the Olaroz
Caucharí salt flat, this research has been able to reach some conclusions on the interactions.
First, the research identified a number of problems related to the space and type of interaction devised
to discuss the environmental impacts of the mining project and other possible effects. None of the
possible spaces fulfilled the process requirements comprised in enforceable international and national
legislation, particularly on the FPIC rights.
Although UGAMP generates multi-stakeholder dialogues, it does not follow a process that is dovetailed to
the culture of the communities. Thus it does not meet the criteria for participation and consultation rights.
The interactions between companies and the communities to discuss the environmental impacts
and other possible effects of the arrival of the projects in their territories – carried out with the
community assemblies where all members are invited to join – is done without the intervention of State
representatives or other external actors (mediators, impartial parties). This would help balance the
asymmetrical power equation. This is particularly worrying as, according to the 169 ILO Convention,
the State cannot delegate the responsibility of consulting communities on projects or activities that
can affect them.
Second, the “informed” element in the free, prior and informed consent is also not fulfilled in the process.
Information was only provided by the main player with an interest in the process (i.e. companies that
seek to get their project approved) and thus it is not impartial. Additionally, it is also not given in the
right format for community members to be able to understand and assess the information. In spite of
companies’ good intentions, it is striking how all interviewees highlighted the lack of understanding of
complex and lengthy information. This reinforces the asymmetry together with the acknowledgment of
community members that they do not have external contacts with other organisations and institutions
that could help them to access alternative information and contest given information.
In summary, the information was not accessible, clear or objective, and thus the communities were
not properly informed to decide on whether to give or withdraw their consent to the projects. In
other words, these circumstances have not fulfilled the UNDRIP requirements or followed the OECD
guidelines regarding information and consultation.
Third, the social vulnerability of communities that lack access to basic services and rights – showing
the lack of presence of the provincial State – together with the lack of employment alternatives and
opportunities in these remote areas, has contributed to a shared understanding of some members
that there is a dichotomy between expressing their views and concerns on environmental impacts
39 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

and receiving the opportunities for job creation. This vulnerable situation could represent a lack of
freedom – which is a key element of FPIC – in giving or withdrawing consent to the project.
This has led to different positions within the same community, in which some groups have minimised their
concerns and questions for fear of losing the opportunities created, while others are openly expressing
their concerns.
Fourth, the environmental concerns of the communities are very much in line with the experts’ opinions
on the matter. Different information gaps were identified by technicians, including lack of baseline
information that could provide solid grounds for understanding ecosystem degradation and the
impacts of lithium extraction in the area. Moreover, the findings of a study conducted by UCA (Catholic
University of Argentina) experts is particularly alarming. The study revealed that more water is being
taken from the watershed than is coming in naturally, hence signaling the possibility of a severe
water stress situation if measures are not taken immediately. These involve modifying the available
techniques to ensure salt water, and thus, the impact on the fresh water, is not severely affected. These
issues will demand further research and broad discussion at the local level.
Fifth, local agencies, particularly the mining secretary – although interested in improving transparency
issues – are not ensuring that the social and environmental standards are met. Local agencies should
make sure to collaborate and interact with specialised agencies (e.g. environmental ministry and
indigenous secretary), which could provide rich inputs to improve institutions and decision-making
processes in future.
If Argentina wants to substantially engage in the global debate around lithium – particularly in a
context when its two main allies-competitors in the region (Chile/Bolivia) are taking time to structure
their policies with a middle- and long-term vision – it is crucial to improve long-term and multi-
stakeholder policy and planning. This includes revising existing frameworks that hinder compliance
with national and international regulations, reinforcing existing legal frameworks and standards and
ensuring capacities and resources are in place to strengthen the role of the State.
9. Recommendations
Considering the main findings, the study has identified a series of recommendations for different
stakeholders, including the State (in its different agencies), the corporate sector and the communities:
To the State:
Regarding the environmental impact assessment:
1. Revise and adapt the norms regulating the environmental impact assessment process in the Jujuy
Province (Decree 5772/2010 and its modification 7592/2011) as they breach national and international
standards regarding citizen participation and FPIC rights.
2. Improve requirements for baseline studies, providing a guide for professionals performing the
environmental impact study on what dimensions need to be included and considered in the case of
lithium mining. Ensure these guidelines are developed in a multi-stakeholder and participatory manner.
3. Ensure that watershed studies are conducted on the whole water-basin in order to understand
and assess the concrete impact of each project in the complete water system, including cumulative
impacts. Hydrological studies and superficial/underground water monitoring should be carried out to
calculate hydrological balance and identify possible salinisation of freshwater.
40 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Regarding the implementation of FPIC rights:
4. Inform communities about their rights, including what is required under FPIC and how these should
be implemented.
5. Provide pro bono lawyers and other professionals within government agencies that can support
communities in understanding and exercising their rights.
6. Ensure state participation with a directing role in the conduction of the FPIC process, involving
State presence in all steps of the process, including meetings between companies and communities.
Also, consider integrating impartial parties (Ombudsman offices, non- governmental organisations,
universities etc.) to the process so they can act as intermediaries in ensuring that power asymmetries
can be counter-balanced.
7. Devise capacity building activities to ensure that all public employees in the appropriate State
agencies understand and know how to implement an FPIC process.
8. Provide redress mechanisms for the lack of FPIC implementation, ensuring the participation of the
affected communities in them.
To corporate actors:
9. Demand that the State should fulfill existing legal and standards at a higher compliance to ensure
benefits for all, avoiding additional costs of legal proceedings to reverse breaches of standards.
10. Disclose all relevant information in a timely, accurate, clear manner and ensuring respect of local
context, customs and language, including:
• corporate structure, entire supply chain, main clients and suppliers
• income, investment and expected returns of the mining extraction
• policies, processes and activities conducted to identify and address actual or potential adverse
human rights and environmental impacts, including the findings and outcomes of those activities
• mapping that identifies, analyses and ranks risks to communities and the environment in
relation to the company’s own activities and their business relationships. This mapping should
include all significant adverse impacts or risks identified, prioritised and assessed, as well as the
prioritisation criteria.
11. Uphold and respect international labour, environmental and human rights standards, including
the Argentine legislation, OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, UN Guiding Principles for
Business and Human Rights, the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention 169 of the International
Labour Organization and the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous people (UNDRIP).
12. Inform other companies involved in the supply chain about the social and environmental impacts of
its activities, and demand that suppliers and contractors should all comply with environmental social
and governance (ESG) standards.
41 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

10. Annexes
10.1. Annex I: Lithium mining projects in Argentina
TABLE 1: MAIN PROJECTS IN ADVANCED STAGES OF LITHIUM DEPOSITS
IN SALT FLATS
Project Name of Company Metals Province Stage
salt flat
Salar de Salar de Orocobre Limited, Toyota Lithium Jujuy Operation
Olaroz Olaroz Tsusho, Jemse Potassium
Mina Fénix Salar del FMC Lithium Corporation Lithium Catamarca Operation
Hombre
Muerto
Salar del Salar del Rincon Limited Lithium Salta Operation
Rincón Rincón Potassium partial/ Pilot
plant
Caucharí- Salar de LithiumAmericas + Lithium Jujuy Building
Olaroz Caucharí JEMSE + GFL Lithium Potassium
Co. LTD + JEMSE +
GFL Lithium Co. LTD
LithiumAmericas +
JEMSE + GFL Lithium
Co. LTD
Pozuelos Salar POSCO + Lithea Lithium Salta Building
Pozuelos Pilot plant
Sal de Vida Salar del Galaxy Resources Lithium Catamarca Feasibility
Hombre Limited Potassium
Muerto
Sal de Los Salar de Lithium-X Energy Corp. Lithium Salta PEA
Ángeles Diablillos (80%) - Aberdeen Potassium (Preliminary
International Inc. (20%) economic
analysis)
Cauchari Salar de Advantage Lithium Lithium Jujuy Advanced
Caucharí (75%) + Orocobre Potassium exploration
Limited (25%)
Salar de Salar de Eramet Lithium Salta Advanced
Centenario Ratones exploration
Ratones
Mariana I, Salar de International Lithium JV Lithium Salta Advanced
II, III Ratones con Jiangxi Ganfeng exploration
Lithium Co. Ltd
Centenario Salar Lithium Power Lithium Salta Advanced
Centenario International Potassium exploration
42 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Project Name of Company Metals Province Stage
salt flat
Gallego Salar del EverlightResources Lithium Salta Advanced
Project Hombre exploration
Muerto
Antofalla Salar de Advantage + Albemarle Lithium Catamarca Advanced
Antofalla + Bolland International Potassium exploration
TABLE 2: MAIN PROJECTS IN INITIAL STAGES OF LITHIUM DEPOSITS
IN SALT FLATS
Project Name of Company Metals Province Stage
salt flat
Guayatayoc Laguna Advantage Lithium Lithium Jujuy Exploration
Guayatayoc Potassium
Boron
Guadalquivir Salar Rio Cascadero Lithium Salta Exploration
Grande Copper Corp.
Stella Maris S Salinas Grandes Advantage Lithium Lithium Salta Exploration
Proyecto Salar de Arizaro PepinNini Lithium Salta Exploration
Arizaro Minerals Ltd.
Salar de Salar de Arizaro Grosso Group Lithium Salta Exploration
Arizaro
Salar de Salar de Arizaro Lithium X Lithium Salta Exploration
Arizaro 2
Mina Teresa Salinas Grandes Argos y Minnerals Lithium Jujuy Initial
Ltd + Ekeko Potassium Exploration
Pocitos Salar Lithium Lithium Salta Initial
de Pocitos AmericasCorp + Potassium Exploration
SQM
Salar de Salar Advantage Lithium Lithium Salta Initial
Incahuasi de Incahuasi Potassium Exploration
Arizaro Salar Lithium Lithium Salta Initial
de Arizaro AmericasCorp Potassium Exploration
+ SQM
San José Salinas DAJIN RESOURCES Lithium Jujuy Prospecting
Grandes CORP./ Delta Mutual Potassium
Inc Boron
Navidad Salinas Grandes DAJIN Lithium Jujuy Prospecting
RESOURCES CORP./ Potassium
Delta Mutual Inc Boron
43 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Rio Grande Salar Rio Lithium Exploration Lithium Salta Prospecting
Grande GroupInc Potassium
Salar de Pular Salar de Pular PepinNini Lithium Salta Prospecting
Minerals Ltd Potassium
Pastos Salar de Millennial Lithium Lithium Salta Prospecting
Grandes Pastos Grandes Potassium
Cauchari Sur Salar de Alba Minerals Ltd. Lithium Salta Prospecting
Caucharí
Cruz Salar de Minera Pastos Lithium Salta Prospecting
Pocitos Grandes S.A +
SouthernLithium
Salar de Salar de Arizaro Ultra Lithium Salta Prospecting
ArizaroBrine LithiumInc.+Jinshan
Minera Argentina
S.A.
Tolillar Salar Tolillar Trendix Mining SRL Lithium Salta Prospecting
Potassium
Salar de Salar de Pure Energy Lithium Salta Prospecting
Pocitos Pocitos Minerals Ltd.
Tres Laguna Tres Neo Lithium Ltd. + Lithium Catamarca Prospecting
Quebradas Quebradas POCML 3 inc. Potassium
(3Q)
La Mula Laguna Mulas Trans Pacific Lithium La Rioja Prospecting
Muertas Minerals Corp
Carachi – Salar NRG Metals Inc. Lithium Catamarca Prospecting
Pampa CarachiPamapa Potassium
Rio Grande Salar de Rio LSC Lithium Lithium Salta Prospecting
Grande Corporation Potassium
Pastos Salar de LSC Lithium Lithium Salta Prospecting
Grandes Pastos Grandes Corporation Potassium
Salinas Salar de LSC Lithium Lithium Salta-Jujuy Prospecting
Grandes Salinas Grandes Corporation + Dajin Potassium
Resources Corp.
Jama Salar de Jama LSC Lithium Lithium Jujuy Prospecting
Corporation Potassium
44 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

TABLE 3: MAIN PROJECTS IN INITIAL STAGES OF LITHIUM DEPOSITS
IN SALT FLATS
Project Name of Company Metals Province Stage
salt flat
Mina Las Distrito Dark Horse Lithium Córdoba Prospecting
Tapias Pegmatítico Resources
Altautina
Mina Las Distrito Dark Horse Lithium San Luis Prospecting
Cuevas Pegmatítico Resources
Conlara
El Quemado Distrito Centenera Lithium Salta Prospecting
Pegmatítico Mining
El Quemado Corporation
Vilisman - Distrito Centenera Lithium Catamarca Prospecting
Ancasti Pegmatítico Mining
Ancasti Corporation
La Distritos Latin Lithium San Luis Prospecting
Estanzuela - Pegmatíticos Resources
Conlara La Ltd + Lepidico
Estanzuela y Ltd.
Conlara
Note. Source: Dirección de Economía Minera (2017). Situación actual y perspectivas. Informe especial. Mercado de Litio.
Retrieved from http://cima.minem.gob.ar/assets/datasets/marzo_2017_-_informe_especial_litio_.pdf (updates were
included by the authors).
45 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

10.2. Annex II: List of interviewees
Location Number of interviewees
Olaroz Chico 3
Manantial de Pastos Chicos 19
Huancar 19
San Salvador de Jujuy 1
Susques 3
46 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

11. Bibliography
Acosta, O. & Custodio Gimena, E. (2008) Impactos ambientales de las extracciones de agua subterránea
en el Salar del Huasco (norte de Chile). Boletín geológico y minero, 119(1), pp. 33-50. Retrieved from
http://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/oaiart?codigo=2703986
Angle, E. S. (2003) Chapter 17 - Hydrogeology of the salt basin; Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History, 279, pp. 469-512.
Borghini, N. (2010) Tenencia precaria de la tierra y políticas públicas en Jujuy, Argentina. Un análisis de
los vínculos entre provincia, nación y pueblos originarios, pp. 130-155.
Brent, W. Z. (2015) Territorial restructuring and resistance in Argentina. The Journal of Peasant Studies,
42: 3-4, pp. 671-694.
Cochilco (2013) Mercado Internacional del Litio. Comisión Chilena del Cobre, Subsecretaría de Minería.
Dente, M. V. & Martinez, S. Cuencas varias de la Puna, Cuenca Nº 83.
De Francesco, V. (2018) La imperiosa necesidad de contar con información confiable. In FARN Revista
Pulso Ambiental N° 10, No todo lo que brilla es LITIO, August 2018.
Dirección de Economía Minera (2017) Situación actual y perspectivas: Mercado de Litio. Informe
especial. Ministerio de Energía y Minería.
Duffy, C. J. & Al-Hassan, S. (1988) Groundwater circulation in a closed desert basin: Topographic scaling
and climatic forcing. Water Resources Research, 24(10), pp. 1675-1688.
FARN. (2012) Minería: la necesidad de revisar el modelo extractivo. Retrieved from http://www.farn.
org.ar/newsite/archives/14158
Fornillo, B. (2015) “Del Salar a la Batería”: Política, ciencia e industria del litio en la Argentina. In
Geopolítica del Litio: Industria, Ciencia y Energía en Argentina, pp. 57-91. Buenos Aires: Editorial el
Colectivo, Clacso.
García Moritán, M. & Cruz, M. (2012) Comunidades Originarias y Grupos Étnicos de la Provincia de Jujuy.
Población & Sociedad, 19(2), pp. 155-173.
Göbel, B. (2013) La minería del litio en la Puna de Atacama: interdependencias transregionales y
disputas locales. Iberoamericana, 49(XIII), pp. 135-149.
Göbel, B. (2017) Seminar. Negociaciones Desiguales: Minería de Litio y Pueblos Originarios en Atacama
(Argentina y Chile). Buenos Aires: Instituto de Investigaciones Gino Germani (UBA).
Grupo de Estudios en Geopolítica y Bienes Naturales (2015) A modo de inicio: la naturaleza del litio.
In Fornillo, B., Geopolítica del Litio: Industria, Ciencia y Energía en Argentina, pp. 57-91. Buenos Aires:
Editorial el Colectivo, Clacso.
Holzbecher, E. (2005) Groundwater flow pattern in the vicinity of a salt lake. Hydrobiologia, 532(1), pp.
233-242. Retrieved from https://search.proquest.com/docview/821241445
International Labour Organization (1991) C169 - Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No.
169); Convention concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries.
47 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Izquierdo, A. E., Aragón, R., Navarro, C. J., Casagranda, E. (2017) Humedales de la Puna: principales
proveedores de servicios ecosistémicos de la región; Serie Conservación de la Naturaleza 24.
Landini, P. y Marcheta, T. (2018) Hablemos de Litio. In FARN Revista Pulso Ambiental N° 10, No todo lo
que brilla es LITIO, August 2018.
Lithium Americas Corp. (2017) Consolidated Financial Statement.
Lithium Americas Corp. (2018) NI 43 – 101 Technical Report. Updated Feasibility Study. Reserve
Estimation and Lithium Carbonate Production at the Cauchari-Olaroz Salars, Jujuy Province, Argentina.
Marazuela, M. A., Vázquez-Suñé, E., Custodio, E., Palma, T., García-Gil, A., Ayora, C. (2018) 3D mapping,
hydrodynamics and modelling of the freshwater-brine mixing zone in salt flats similar to the salar de
Atacama (Chile). Journal of Hydrology.
Marchegiani, P. y Di Paola, M. M. (2017) La Minería en la tierra de plata ¿Políticas mineras o mineras
que (trans)forman la política? FARN.
Marconi P., Clark A. (2018) Flamencos Altoandinos y Salares – El Altiplano de Catamarca. In FARN
Revista Pulso Ambiental N° 10, No todo lo que brilla es LITIO, August 2018.
Naciones Unidas. (2007) Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Retrieved from https://www.
un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2018/11/UNDRIP_E_
web.pdf
OCDE. (2011) Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, OCDE.
OEA. (2013) Premio Interamericano a la Innovación para la Gestión Pública Efectiva 2013. Organización
de Estados Americanos, Secretaría de Asuntos Políticos (SAP)/Departamento para la Gestión Pública
Efectiva (DGPE).
Orocobre. (2016) ASX/TSX Announcement. Appendix 4E Results for announcement to the market. 19
September 2016. Retrieved from https://www.orocobre.com/wp/?mdocs-file=2203
Orocobre (2018a) ASX/TSX Announcement. Quarterly Report of Operations for the Period Ended 31
December 2018. Retrieved from https://www.orocobre.com/wp/?mdocs-file=5253
Orocobre. (2018b) Investor presentation. November 2018. Retrieved from https://www.orocobre.com/
wp/?mdocs-file=4982
Ortiz, C., Aravena, R., Briones, E., Suárez, F., Tore, C., Muñoz, J. F. (2014) Sources of surface water for the
soncor ecosystem, salar de Atacama basin, Northern Chile. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 59(2), pp.
336-350. Retrieved from https://search.proquest.com/docview/1503760246
Puente, F. y Argento, M. (2015) Conflictos territoriales y construcción identitaria en los salares del
noroeste argentino. In Fornillo, B., Geopolítica del Litio: Industria, Ciencia y Energía en Argentina, pp.
123-161. Buenos Aires: Editorial el Colectivo, Clacso.
Secretaría de Minería (2017) Minería al 2022. Puna Argentina. Situación actual y su potencialidad.
Ministerio de Energía y Minería.
Sieland, R. (2002) Hydraulic investigations of the salar de Uyuni, Bolivia.
48 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

Solá, R. (2016) Kachi Yupi: Un Ejercicio de Autodeterminación Indígena en Salinas Grandes. In Informe
Ambiental Anual 2016 FARN, pp. 215-237.
Ströbele-Georg, J. (2015) Desigualdades estructurales en el aprovechamiento de un recurso estratégico.
La economía global del litio y el caso de Bolivia, Working Papers Series 79.
Sun, X., Han, H., Zhao, F., Liu, Z. (2017) Tracing global lithium flow: A trade-linked material flow analysis.
Resources, Conservation & Recycling 124, pp. 50–61.
Svampa, M. (2013) “Consenso de los Commodities” y lenguajes de valoración en América Latina. Nueva
Sociedad, 244, pp. 30–46.
Tahil, W. (2007) The trouble with lithium. Implications of Future PHEV Production for Lithium Demand.
Martainville: Meridian International Research.
Télam (14 May 2017) Argentina prevé triplicar su producción de litio en cinco años con inversiones
por USD 1500 millones. Retrieved from http://www.telam.com.ar/notas/201705/188970-argentina-
triplicar-produccion-litio.html
Zamudio, T. (2011) Derecho de Los Pueblos Indígenas.
Zilla, C. (2013) Fragmentation or Cooperation in Global Resource Governance? A Comparative Analysis
of the Raw Materials Strategies of the G20, Hilpert H.G.; Mildner S-A (Eds.), Stiftung Wissenschaft und
Politik (SWP) y Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR).
Other sources:
Amnistía Internacional. (2017) Human Rights Agenda for Argentina. Retrieved from https://amnistia.
org.ar/wp-content/uploads/delightful-downloads/2017/02/PRENSA-ingles4.pdf
BIS Group, website https://bisresearch.com/industry-report/global-electric-vehicles-battery-
market-2026.html
Frankel, T. C. & Whoriskey, P. (19 December 2016) Tossed aside in the “white gold” rush. The Washington
Post. Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/business/batteries/tossed-aside-in-
the-lithium-rush/ (last accessed 25 July 2018).
Lezcano, M. (2015) Jujuy: en la escuela de Huáncar, los alumnos aprenden sin agua y sin electricidad
y pasan frío. Radio Continental. http://www.continental.com.ar/escucha/archivo_de_audio/jujuy-en-
la-escuela-de-huancar-los-alumnos-aprenden-sin-agua-y-sin-electricidad-y-pasan-frio/20150326/
oir/2691239.aspx
Sticco, M. (2018) El impacto de la explotación del litio en las reservas de agua dulce. Provincia de Jujuy,
Argentina. Conversatorio El impacto del litio en las reservas de agua. UNJU. October 2018.
49 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA

This report has been supported by the GoodElectronics Network, SOMO and the European
Union. The contents of this report are the sole responsibility of FARN and can under no
circumstances be regarded as reflecting the position of the European Union.
50 LITHIUM EXTRACTION
IN ARGENTINA