Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable,
and circular
Battery demand is growing—and so is the need for
better solutions along the value chain.
This article is a collaborative effort by McKinsey in cooperation with the Global Battery Alliance and its members. The authors include
Jakob Fleischmann, Mikael Hanicke, Evan Horetsky, Dina Ibrahim, Sören Jautelat, Martin Linder, Patrick Schaufuss, Lukas Torscht, and
Alexandre van de Rijt.

Global demand for batteries is increasing, And rather than just greenwashing—making
driven largely by the imperative to reduce climate half-hearted efforts to appear environmentally
change through electrification of mobility and friendly—companies must commit to extensive
the broader energy transition. Just as analysts decarbonization and true sustainability.
tend to underestimate the amount of energy
generated from renewable sources, battery demand Faced with these imperatives, battery
forecasts typically underestimate the market size manufacturers should play offense, not defense,
and are regularly corrected upwards. In an earlier when it comes to green initiatives. This article
publication, a joint 2019 report by McKinsey, the describes how the industry can become sustainable,
Global Battery Alliance (GBA), and Systemiq, A circular, and resilient along the entire value chain
vision for a sustainable battery value chain in 2030, through a combination of collaborative actions,
we projected a market size of 2.6 TWh and yearly standardized processes and regulations, and
growth of 25 percent by 2030. But a 2022 analysis greater data transparency. By emphasizing
by the McKinsey Battery Insights team projects sustainability, leading battery players will
that the entire lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery chain, differentiate themselves from the competition and
from mining through recycling, could grow by over generate value while simultaneously protecting the
30 percent annually from 2022 to 2030, when it environment. The strategies and goals presented
would reach a value of more than $400 billion and a here are aligned with both McKinsey’s battery
market size of 4.7 TWh.¹ supply chain vision and the GBA’s principles.
Although battery growth will confer multiple
environmental and social benefits, many Global market outlook for 2030
challenges lie ahead. To avoid shortages, battery Global demand for Li-ion batteries is expected to
manufacturers must secure a steady supply of soar over the next decade, with the number of GWh
both raw material and equipment. They must also required increasing from about 700 GWh in 2022
channel their investment to the right areas and to around 4.7 TWh by 2030 (Exhibit 1). Batteries for
execute large-scale industrialization efficiently. mobility applications, such as electric vehicles (EVs),
Web <year>
E<xTihtleib>it 1
Exhibit <x> of <x>
Li-ion battery demand is expected to grow by about 33 percent annually to
Li-ion battery demand is expected to grow by about 33 percent annually to
reach around 4,700 GWh by 2030.
reach around 4,700 GWh by 2030.
Global Li-ion battery cell demand, GWh, Base case
By region By sector
~4,700 ~4,700
Rest of world Consumer
United States electronics
+27% ~6x
Europe Stationary
per annum
China storage
Mobility
~1,700 ~1,700
~700 ~700
2022 2025 2030 2022 2025 2030
1Including passenger cars, commercial vehicles, two-to-three wheelers, off-highway vehicles, and aviation.
Source: McKinsey Battery Insights Demand Model
McKinsey & Company
1 These estimates are based on recent data for Li-ion batteries for electric mobility, battery electric storage systems (BESS), and consumer
goods.
2 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

will account for the vast bulk of demand in 2030— China could account for 45 percent of total Li-ion
about 4,300 GWh; an unsurprising trend seeing that demand in 2025 and 40 percent in 2030—most
mobility is growing rapidly. This is largely driven by battery-chain segments are already mature in that
three major drivers: country. Nevertheless, growth is expected to be
highest globally in the EU and the United States,
— A regulatory shift toward sustainability, which driven by recent regulatory changes, as well as a
includes new net-zero targets and guidelines, general trend toward localization of supply chains.
including Europe’s “Fit for 55” program, the US In total, at least 120 to 150 new battery factories will
Inflation Reduction Act, the 2035 ban of internal need to be built between now and 2030 globally.
combustion engine (ICE) vehicles in the EU, and
India’s Faster Adoption and Manufacture of In line with the surging demand for Li-ion batteries
Hybrid and Electric Vehicles Scheme. across industries, we project that revenues along
the entire value chain will increase 5-fold, from
— Greater customer adoption rates and increased about $85 billion in 2022 to over $400 billion
consumer demand for greener technologies (up in 2030 (Exhibit 2). Active materials and cell
to 90 percent of total passenger car sales will manufacturing may have the largest revenue pools.
involve EVs in selected countries by 2030). Mining is not the only option for sourcing battery
materials, since recycling is also an option. Although
— Announcements by 13 of the top 15 OEMs to the recycling segment is expected to be relatively
ban ICE vehicles and achieve new emission- small in 2030, it is projected to grow more than
reduction targets. three-fold in the following decade, when more
batteries reach their end-of-life.
Battery energy storage systems (BESS) will have a
CAGR of 30 percent, and the GWh required to power Companies in the EU and US are among those that
these applications in 2030 will be comparable to the have announced plans for new mining, refining, and
GWh needed for all applications today. cell production projects to help meet demand, such
Exhibit 2
Our model projects that the Li-ion battery value chain will provide revenue
Our model projects that the Li-ion battery value chain will provide revenue
opportunities of over $400 billion by 2030.
opportunities of over $400 billion by 2030.
Revenues, base case 2030, $ billion
Active Reuse and
Mining Refining materials Cell Pack recycle
~400
Total 34 (9%) 52 (13%) 110 (27%) 121 (30%) 74 (18%) 13 (3%)
185
China 15 22 54 53 34 6
~5x
Europe 10 15 31 37 22 3
118
United
6 9 14 20 11 2
~85 States
61
Rest of
3 5 11 11 7 2
world
39
2022 2030
Source: McKinsey Battery Insights, 2022
McKinsey & Company
Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular 3

as the creation or expansion of battery factories. forced labor, and indigenous rights, especially
Many European and US companies are also in emerging markets.
exploring new business models for the recycling
segment. Together, these activities could help — Governance: Businesses in the battery value
localize battery supply chains. chain may encounter conflicts of interest or
other companies with subpar management
practices. To meet longstanding expectations
Today’s value chain challenges for ethical businesses, companies must avoid
The global battery value chain, like others within financial situations involving corruption, bribery,
industrial manufacturing, faces significant funding armed conflicts, and tax evasion.
environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
challenges (Exhibit 3). Together with GBA To conduct business in a socially and ecologically
members representing the entire battery value responsible way, it is crucial for stakeholders in the
chain, McKinsey has identified 21 risks along ESG battery value chain to consider and address these
dimensions: ESG risks. (See sidebar, “Industry perspectives on
sustainability” for more information on priorities).
— Environmental: The extraction and refining of Success will likely depend on deploying sufficient
raw materials, as well as cell production, can resources as well as greater transparency and
have severe environmental effects, such as better mitigation measures—regulations and
land degradation, biodiversity loss, creation early planning could help ensure that companies
of hazardous waste, or contamination of alleviate risks along the entire value chain. Further,
water, soil, and air. Unprofessional or even compliance and corporate risk will have to include
illegal battery disposal can cause severe toxic ESG issues in their operational risk-management
pollution. This is a problem within today’s lead- practices and processes to tackle them holistically.
acid battery value chain. Many companies, however, still see mastering
ESG as a cost and a burden. We strongly believe
— Social: Unless strictly managed, operations they need to embrace this challenge and view it as
across the battery value chain could have one of the greatest business opportunities of the
unfavorable effects on regional communities century. It’s time to stop playing defense and start
through violations of labor laws, child and playing offense.
WeEb x<yheiabr>it 3
<Title>
ExhTibiht <ex> bof a<xt>tery value chain continues to face numerous environmental, social, and
Thgeo vbeartntearny cvea lcuhea clhleaning ceosn.tinues to face numerous environmental, social, and
governance challenges.
Environmental Social Governance
Land pollution
Water pollution Radioactive pollution
Air pollution Need to protect biodiversity
Greenhouse-gas emissions Deforestation, land degradation
Transparency and reporting Resource drainage
Customer health and safety Challenges Need to ensure health and safety
Information management Child or forced labor
Tax evasion Need to ensure fair working
conditions and wages
Anticompetitive practices Discrimination and harassment
Need for sustainable supplier management Need to protect indigenous rights
and local communities
Corruption and bribery Warlords or terrorists
McKinsey & Company
4 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

Industry perspectives on sustainability
Here are what some battery industry leaders and experts have to say about sustainability:
“Our Battery 2030 report, produced by McKinsey together with the Global Battery Alliance, reveals the true extent of global battery
demand – and the need for far greater transparency and sustainability across the entire value chain. The lithium-ion battery value
chain is set to grow by over 30 percent annually from 2022-2030, in line with the rapid uptake of electric vehicles and other clean en-
ergy technologies. The scaling of the value chain calls for a dramatic increase in the production, refining and recycling of key minerals,
but more importantly, it must take place with ESG considerations at front and center. It is time we transition to a more circular, sustain-
able, and just value chain that protects our planet’s biodiversity, resources, and ensures that human rights are respected globally. We
can achieve the sustainable future we all desire, but only if we work together for it.”
— Benedikt Sobotka, CEO, Eurasian Resources Group
“The transformation towards battery electric mobility is a gigantic challenge for industrial structures and workers. The social impact will
depend on the application of a just transition concept: investment in skills, creation of new and decent jobs, social dialogue/collective
bargaining and a more balanced value creation model between the Global North and the Global South.”
— Atle Høie, IndustriALL General Secretary
“Umicore is a proud founding member of the Global Battery Alliance and a strong supporter of its Battery Passport project, as they
align with our ambition to roll out a decarbonized and responsible battery supply chain. Acceleration in EV sales will go hand in hand
with unprecedented growth in the production of rechargeable batteries that are sustainably sourced, manufactured, used and recy-
cled. By sharing our longstanding industry expertise in battery materials and battery recycling through partnerships like the GBA, we
aim to raise the bar to reach true clean mobility.”
— Mathias Miedreich, CEO of Umicore
“When we published our first GBA Vision for Sustainable Batteries 2030, with McKinsey in 2019, we understood and laid out the
dramatic shift in the demand for batteries, critical minerals and assurances of sustainable and ethical practices that would be required.
What we did not predict was how the scale and urgency of that demand would escalate so quickly and at a pace rarely seen in history.
This updated report brings essential and timely new data to inform the actions needed going forward. Given this shift and pace, now
Exhibit 3
more than ever, our work as the Global Battery Alliance, and the importance of collaborative, multi-stakeholder action has never been
The battery value chain continues to face numerous environmental, social, and
more relevant or needed.”
governance challenges.
— Gillian Davidson, Sustainability Advisor, Eurasian Resources Group, GBA Chair of the Board of Directors
“The members of the Global Battery Alliance are committed to achieving sustainable, circular, and responsible battery value chains
by 2030. The results of the McKinsey analysis underline both the continued relevance and highlight the sense of urgency with which
we need to achieve this vision. The GBA battery passport is a key tool to enhance transparency in battery value chains and enhance
sustainability impacts including the progressive reduction of greenhouse gas emissions within battery value chains.”
— Inga Petersen, Executive Director, Global Battery Alliance
“Three years ago McKinsey supported GBA and demonstrated the importance of a pre competitive transparent battery value chain to
drive the energy transformation, today’s updated report magnifies not only the importance but also the magnitude and urgency.”
— Guy Éthier, Past Chairman of the Board of Directors, Global Battery Alliance
Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular 5

Besides the much-publicized ESG challenges, those with a low CO2 footprint—they might capture
GBA members have pointed out that the battery a green premium, since demand is ramping up
value chain confronts massive economic for such products. It may be difficult to provide
barriers (Exhibit 4). Historic price peaks and sustainable materials in the quantities needed to
extreme volatility, as well as quickly changing meet demand, however.
national regulations, can massively affect the
economic viability of projects. Higher battery Producers and purchasers could mitigate
prices also make some green applications far potential shortages of raw materials by redefining
less attractive than they were previously, which their strategies and operations to be economic,
could delay much-needed attempts to accelerate transparent, sustainable, and circular. For
decarbonization. Although economic viability is instance, producers need to build or re-create
the most urgent issue for leaders, a more complex a growth agenda based on economic viability to
challenge involves the industrialization and historic ensure execution. Further, they need to strive
scale-up of the battery industry. for continuous innovation in productivity and
decarbonization of operations while simultaneously
Dealing with shortages pursuing diverse partnerships that will embed them
Shortages of manufacturing equipment, in downstream supply chains. Purchasers, on the
construction material, and the skilled labor other hand, must adapt technology rollout plans—for
required to ramp up production are a few reasons instance, by increasing flexibility regarding battery
why many battery-cell factories experience technologies and raw-materials requirements—
significant delays. Vertical supply-chain and accelerate innovation on product design
integration and long-term contracts, as well as and material usage. They must also send clear
greater collaboration, could mitigate some of these signals about long-term demand. to decrease the
issues. Additionally, open dialogue and education uncertainties about market size that often deter
with local communities and stakeholders are likely producers from undertaking multi-billion dollar
key to achieving more widespread acceptance and mining and refining projects, which often have 20 to
support for the battery industry. 30 year lifetimes.
The metals and mining sector will supply the Purchasers should aim for strategic-green-
high quality raw materials needed to transition procurement excellence by identifying potential
to greener energy sources, including batteries. If mines and refineries across different geographies
companies can provide sustainable materials— and then assess their volume, quality, environmental
Web <year>
Exhibit 4
<Title>
WExhhibiit l<ex> e ofc <ox>nomic challenges to the battery industry are obvious, the real
dWiffihicleu letcyo lnieosm inic i cmhpallelemnegnetsa ttioo nth aen bda itntedruys itnrdiaulsiztaryti aorne. obvious, the real
difficulty lies in implementation and industrialization.
Above the surface
Economics:
• Raw material and energy price peaks and volatility
• Regulatory harmonization and standardization
• Incentives, subsidies, and taxes
Below the surface
Industrialization:
• Constrained and disrupted supply chains
• Need for collaboration and intellectual property protection
• Technology disruption and uncertainty
• Material and machinery shortage
• Need for talent and skilled labor
• Societal acceptance
McKinsey & Company
6 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

impact (looking not just at greenhouses gases but under development that will likely be available soon.
all planetary boundaries). It will also be important The team’s full potential scenario considers the
to evaluate the societal risks involved in securing impact of pipeline projects that are still in the earlier
an adequate supply. Players along the entire value stages of development, as well as the effect of
chain must step up their game to enable true technology innovation and the potential addition of
circularity by creating tight loops, such as those for new mining and refining capacity.
life extension, rather than just focusing on the wide
loop of recycling. Last, the entire value chain needs While some battery materials will be in short supply,
to step up their game in enabling true circularity with others will likely experience oversupply, making
tight loops like life extension, rather than just the it more difficult to plan. The success factors for
wide loop of recycling. ensuring a sufficient global supply include obtaining
greater transparency on supply and demand uptake,
This article and the underlying data and analytics proactively identifying the need for new mining and
can help promote better planning by the relevant refining capacities to avoid bottlenecks, channeling
stakeholders in the private and public sectors, as investments into new capacity, and improving
well as by investors. These stakeholders require a investment returns and risk management.
reliable fact-base and transparency on raw-material
demand and supply imbalances to de-risk their Almost 60 percent of today’s lithium is mined for
investments. battery-related applications, a figure that could
reach 95 percent by 2030 (Exhibit 5). Lithium
Batteries require a mix of raw materials, and various reserves are well distributed and theoretically
pressures currently make it difficult to procure sufficient to cover battery demand, but high-grade
adequate supplies. McKinsey’s MineSpans team, deposits are mainly limited to Argentina, Australia,
which rigorously tracks global mining and refining Chile, and China. With technological shifts toward
capacity projects, has created several future more lithium-heavy batteries, lithium mining will
scenarios based on available information. The base- need to increase significantly. Meeting demand for
case scenario for raw-material availability in 2030 lithium in 2030 will require stakeholders to strive
considers both existing capacity and new sources for the full potential scenario, which factors in the
Exhibit 5
LLiitthhiiuumm ccoouulldd bbee iinn eexxttrreemmeellyy sshhoorrtt ssuuppppllyy iiff nnoo ffuurrtthheerr p prroojejeccttss aarree ddeevveellooppeedd..
Lithium carbonate global equivalent demand 2030, supply 2021 and 2030 by country, kt
3,500
3,000
2,500
–55% Global
Rest of world
2,000
Chile
China
1,500
17% Australia
1,000 20%
16%
10%
500 28%
17% 46%
45%
0
2021 supply 2030 demand 2030 base scenario
Source: McKinsey MineSpans, 2022
McKinsey & Company
7

impact of almost every currently announced project Approximately 75 percent of today’s mined cobalt
in the pipeline and will require significant additional originates from the Democratic Republic of
investment in mining projects. The full potential Congo (DRC), largely as a by-product of copper
scenario also involves putting greater emphasis on production (Exhibit 7). The remainder is largely
smart product technology choices, such as the use a by-product of nickel production. The share
of silicon anodes instead of Li-metal. of cobalt in batteries is expected to decrease
while supply is expected to increase, driven by
Nickel reserves are dispersed across various the growth in copper mining in the DRC and
countries, including Australia, Canada, Indonesia, of nickel mining, primarily in Southeast Asia.
and Russia (Exhibit 6). In our base scenario, there While shortages of cobalt are unlikely, volatility
would only be a small shortage of nickel in 2030 in supply and price may persist because it is
because of the recent transition to more lithium iron generally obtained as a by-product.
phosphate (LFP) chemistries and plans to increase
mining capacity. Although McKinsey’s full potential Supply of manganese should remain stable
scenario projects a significant oversupply of nickel through 2030 since no announcements of
if stakeholders achieve their planned mining and additional capacity are expected (Exhibit
refining potential, companies could still have 8). Demand for manganese will likely slightly
difficulty acquiring sufficient quantities because increase and, thus, our base scenario estimates
of quality requirements (for instance, the need for a slight supply shortage. The industry should
class 1 nickel rather than class 2 nickel in the form of be aware that some uncertainty surrounds
ferroalloys) and the limited geographic distribution manganese demand projections because lithium
of mines. No matter how supply evolves, the manganese iron phosphate (LMFP) cathode
industry will need to consider one critical question: chemistries could potentially gain higher market
How to find sustainable nickel for batteries? In shares, especially in the commercial vehicle
answering this question, companies must consider segment.
CO2 intensity differences across assets.
Exhibit 6
TThhee ccuurrrreennt tp prorjoejcetc pti ppeiplienlei nsueg sguegstgse as stlsig ah st luignhdet rusnupdpelrys oufp npilcyk oelf. nickel.
Nickel global demand 2030, supply 2021 and 2030 by country, kt
5,000
4,000 –8%
32% Global
3,000
Rest of world
France
7%
Philippines
9% Indonesia
2,000
47%
9%
1,000 52%
14%
29%
0
2021 supply 2030 demand 2030 base scenario
Source: McKinsey MineSpans, 2022
McKinsey & Company
8 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

Exhibit 7
Cobalt supply will be more than sufficient because of the higher market share
Cobalt supply will be more than sufficient because of the higher market share
of low-cobalt cathode chemistries.
of low-cobalt cathode chemistries.
Cobalt global demand 2030, supply 2021 and 2030 by country, kt
350
300 +15% 13%
2%
7%
250
Global
Rest of world
200 Indonesia
Cuba
150 19% Australia
3% DRC
3% 78%
100
75%
50
0
2021 supply 2030 demand 2030 base scenario
Source: McKinsey MineSpans, 2022
McKinsey & Company
Exhibit 6 Exhibit 8
The current project pipeline suggests a slight undersupply of nickel. MMaannggaannesees dee mdeanmda cnodul dc osluigldht slyl iegxhcteleyd esuxpcpeley.d supply.
Manganese global demand 2030, supply 2021 and 2030 by country, kt
25,000
–8%
20,000
30% 29%
Global
15,000 Rest of the world
13%
14%
Australia
Gabon
20%
10,000 20% South Africa
5,000
36% 38%
0
2021 supply 2030 demand 2030 base scenario
Source: McKinsey MineSpans, 2022
McKinsey & Company
9

Mitigating emissions manufacturing emissions per vehicle are double
Battery electric vehicles (BEVs) often are criticized those of ICE vehicles. These greenhouse-gas
for their greenhouse-gas footprint throughout emissions before the use phase are responsible
their life cycle. However, although results vary for 40 to 95 percent of total life-cycle emissions
significantly depending on factors such as milage, of BEVs, depending on the grid electricity used for
production, and electricity grid emissions, our charging. Decarbonizing production, primarily for
models clearly indicate that BEVs are the most battery, aluminum and steel, is therefore much more
effective decarbonization option for passenger cars. critical for BEVs than it has been for ICEs.
Our calculations show that total emissions are much In the next five to seven years, ambitious
lower today for BEVs than vehicles with internal players might cut the carbon footprint of battery
combustion engines (ICE), because BEVs emit manufacturing by up to 90 percent, but this would
lower emissions during the use phase (the time that call for changes throughout the whole value chain.
vehicles are on the road) (Exhibit 9). In the worst
case scenario, with no low-carbon electricity, total Different tactics can aid in abatement. In the
life-cycle emissions for BEVs are about 50 percent best-case scenario, some of these would
lower in Europe and 72 percent lower in the United result in cost savings, while others would entail
States compared with ICE vehicles. Once recharged large expenditures. Under the most beneficial
with low-carbon electricity during the use phase, circumstances, companies might potentially
BEVs achieve even better life-cycle carbon decarbonize up to 80 percent of emissions at a
footprints than ICE vehicles, with about 77 percent minimum additional cost (Exhibit 10). The site of
lower emissions in Europe and 88 percent lower manufacturing and the intended market, including
emissions in the United States. Although BEVs are its carbon price, customer demand, and willingness
superior in life-cycle emissions, their material and
Exhibit 9
Lifecycle emissions are lower with battery electric vehicles than internal
combustion engine vehicles.
Lifecycle emissions are lower with battery electric vehicles than internal
combustion engine vehicles.
Lifetime CO₂e emissions by vehicle powertrain type, metric tons
United States Europe Use phase¹
100 100 Production
emission²
82
80 80
60 60
44
40 40
23
21
20 20
10 10
0 0
BEV³ BEV³,⁵ ICE⁶ BEV³ BEV³,⁵ ICE⁶
Clean grid mix⁴ gasoline Clean grid mix⁴ gasoline
1Estimated use phase of 243,000 km.
2Production emission references global average vehicle C-segment.
3BEV models account for 10% charging losses.
4Clean grid perspective for use phase only; excluding additional emission savings by, eg, green steel and clean battery cathode/anode material.
5Estimated BEV average energy consumption of 15 kWh per 100 km and electricity generation according to European 2021 EU energy mix and US energy mix.
6509 g/mile of CO2e emissions for average US ICE gasoline.
Source: McKinsey Center for Future Mobility, McKinsey Sustainability Insights
McKinsey & Company
10 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

Web <year>
<Title>
Exhibit <x> of <x>
ExFhoibri tb 1a0tteries with nickel-manganese-cobalt cathode chemistries, most carbon
Faobr abtaetmteerinets l ewviethrs n ciackne bl-em imanpgleamneesnet-ecdob faolrt lceastsh tohdaen c €h5e0m/itsCtrOie₂.s, most carbon
abatement levers can be implemented for less than €50/tCO2.
2025 marginal abatement cost curve for Scope 1–3 upstream¹ excl. lifetime emissions
Cell manufacturing Anode Cathode Housing
and pack assembling current collector active material
Raw materials Cathode Anode
current collector active material
250
Recycle all
scrap from cells
150
Switch from Procure recycled
wet to dry coating raw materials (vs virgin)
Abatement 50
cost 0
to 2025, –50 30 Switch to 60
€/tCO₂
Switch to hydrogen
green electricity for heat
–150
–250
–350 Abated emissions, kgCO₂/kWh
1Scope 3 emissions are the result of activities from assets not owned or controlled by the reporting organization but that have indirect impacts in its value ch
Suppliers are assumed to be in China for all components.
Source: Catalyst Zero, McKinsey, 2022; McKinsey MineLens, 2022; McKinsey analysis for 2025
McKinsey & Company
Exhibit 9 to pay potential green premiums, will help determine upstream, acquire the capable machinery
Lifecycle emissions are lower with battery electric vehicles than internal how cost competitive low-carbon batteries may be. mid-stream to suit the battery chemistry and
combustion engine vehicles. application, and recruit the indispensable talent
The most effective decarbonization levers include required for those projects.
the use of circular materials and low-carbon
electricity. Their economic attractiveness may vary, The uncertainty about cell technologies and
however, primarily because of local issues, such as form factors supplied by different producers
electricity feed-in-tariffs, subsidies, and available also imposes significant complexity costs and
materials. risks to the after-sales, repair, and maintenance
of batteries. Vehicle OEMs need to ensure that
EV battery modules and packs can be replaced
Technological advances at a low cost long after the typical eight-year
Some recent advances in battery technologies warranty period.
include increased cell energy density, new active
material chemistries such as solid-state batteries, To manage uncertainty, battery cell
and cell and packaging production technologies, manufacturers need to plan their target
including electrode dry coating and cell-to-pack investments carefully and scout for external
design (Exhibit 11). funding opportunities, such as green bonds or
subsidies in relevant regions. Simultaneously,
When making investments decisions, battery they should accomplish several other important
manufacturers could find these rapid advances tasks: plan their manufacturing plants, optimize
challenging. After choosing the battery technology short- and long-term costs to ensure agility
that fits their application needs best, they should and adaptability of production lines, and steer
then quickly secure the required raw material investments into new technologies.
Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular 11

Exhibit 11
Innovations in the battery industry affect all cell components.
Innovations in the battery industry affect all cell components.
Common battery chemistries and form factor available
2010s 2020s 2030s
1 Cathode LCO¹ LMO2 LFP³ LFP³ NMC⁴/NCA⁵ LMFP⁶/LMNO⁷
LFP³ NMC⁴/NCA⁵ NMC⁴/NCA⁵ LMFP⁶/LMNO⁷ Sulphur
NMC⁴/NCA⁵ LMFP⁶/LMNO⁷ Sulphur
2 Separator/ Polymer/liquid Polymer/liquid Polymer/liquid Polymer/liquid Polymer/liquid Advanced liquid
electrolyte Advanced liquid Semi-solid
Semi-solid Solid
3 Anode Graphite Graphite Graphite Graphite Graphite and Lithium metal
GGrraapphhiittee aanndd silicon Silicon anode
silicon Lithium metal
Silicon anode
4 Casing Cylindrical Cylindrical Prismatic Prismatic Cylindrical Cylindrical
Pouch Cylindrical Cylindrical Pouch Pouch
Pouch Pouch Prismatic
1Lithium cobalt.
2Lithium manganese oxide.
3Lithium, iron, phosphate.
4Lithium, manganese cobalt.
5Lithium, nickel, cobalt, aluminum oxide.
6Lithium manganese iron phosphate.
7Lithium, manganese nickel oxide.
Source: McKinsey Battery Insights, 2022
McKinsey & Company
Battery 2030: resilient, sustainable, and projected jobs—80 percent higher than in our
circular 2019 report—relates to the higher expected
The 2030 outlook for the battery value chain depends battery demand estimates for 2030.
on three interdependent elements (Exhibit 12):
— A focus on sustainability. Batteries are a major
— Supply-chain resilience. A resilient battery value tool in the challenge to decarbonize the mobility
chain is one that is regionalized and diversified. sector and other industries—a task that is
We envision that each region will cover over 90 essential to avoid triggering irreversible climate
percent of local cell demand, over 80 percent tipping points. The battery revolution could
of local active material demand, and over 60 reduce cumulative greenhouse-gas emissions
percent of refined materials demand. In addition, by up to 70 GtCO2e between 2021 and 2050
by recycling raw materials that are primarily found in the road transport sector alone. However,
in one location (such as cobalt), countries can the battery industry will need to prioritize the
reduce their dependency on others. A recycling decarbonization of its own industry to maintain
target of 80 percent, as recently specified in the its credibility. Our analysis suggests that
EU battery directive, could become an aspiration material and manufacturing emissions could fall
for 2030 for all regions globally. Across the entire 90 percent per kWh battery on the cell level by
value chain, the industry could contribute to up 2030. Further pack level emissions will mostly
to 18 million jobs in 2030 by securing existing depend on achievements in decarbonizing
positions and creating new ones. The number of aluminum, steel, and plastic production. The
12 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

Exhibit 11
Innovations in the battery industry affect all cell components. E W x eb h < ib ye it a r 1 > 2
<Title>
OExhuibirt < 2x>0 of3 <0x> vision for the battery value chain focuses on resiliency, sustainability,
aOnudr 2ci0r3cu0l vairsiitoyn. for the battery value chain focuses on resiliency, sustainability,
and circularity.
A resilient supply chain An industry enhancing A circular value chain fostering
boosting social value sustainability footprint innovative technologies
6 –90% $6 billion
continents with large scale battery carbon footprint per kWh additional profit with a
value chains covering majority of battery produced in robust recycling ecosystem
of domestic demand 2030 versus 2022 by 2040
The scale up of the global battery value chain will likely support about
18 million jobs (new and existing) along the entire value chain and could reduce
cumulative road transport emissions from 2021 through 2050 by about 70 GtCO₂e¹.
1CtCO₂e equals one billion tons of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Source: McKinsey & Company
McKinsey & Company
industry could also benefit from setting ambitious potential of a circular value chain. Companies
improvement targets in the nine planetary could benefit from investigating sustainable
boundaries that the Stockholm Resilience and economically viable applications that
Center defined and quantified. These include would increase circularity, or by leveraging
freshwater change, stratospheric ozone depletion, technological advances that contribute to
atmospheric aerosol loading, ocean acidification, this goal.
biogeochemical flows, novel entities, land-system
change, biosphere integrity, and climate change. At a minimum, the battery industry’s growth
Significant improvements for all social and must help fulfill basic human, product, and
governmental challenges mentioned earlier are economic needs. Important goals include social
also necessary to achieve true sustainability. welfare, inclusive value creation, adherence to
international law, emphasis on human rights,
— Creation of a circular value chain. The battery creation of durable and performing products,
industry has to move from a linear to a circular and economic viability for businesses. To create
value chain—one in which used materials are a well-functioning value chain, companies should
repaired, reused, or recycled. This transformative attempt to avoid any shortcomings in these
approach may also create huge economic areas. For sustainability, the battery industry
potential, with some opportunities already can only achieve true sustainability if it does not
available today (for instance, scrap recycling). A overshoot any of the nine planetary boundaries
large cross-industry effort and coordination will that the Stockholm Resilience Center defined
be needed for stakeholders to achieve the full and quantified.
Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular 13

Based on our extensive experience in the global as-a-service, repair, refurbishment and second-
battery value chain, we have identified ten life applications. If none of these options is
transformational success factors that will pave the available, then battery recycling is essential.
way for our 2030 vision in which batteries power a Circularity will necessitate cross-industry
resilient, sustainable, and circular future (Exhibit 13). collaboration and partnerships, as well as data
transparency and harmonized standards.
Establishing value chain circularity. Achieving
circularity along the entire value chain could Increasing energy efficiency and electrification
increase resilience against supply shortages and share. Most large-scale battery factories that
price volatility. It will also mitigate risks related to will be operational in 2030, and for many years
battery-waste disposal. Companies could gain beyond, are now being built. As such, mastering
additional value by adopting circular business energy efficiency—for instance, via building
models, such as battery as-a-service or mobility insulation or heat recovery—is key.
Exhibit 13
Ten transformational success factors are essential to build a resilient,
Ten transformational success factors are essential to build a resilient,
sustainable, and circular battery value chain by 2030.
sustainable, and circular battery value chain by 2030.
Factors for a successful battery value chain
Circular Sustainable Resilient Planetary boundaries Human, product, and economic needs
Increasing Minimizing
energy environmental
efficiency and impacts
electrification beyond
share climate
Establishing Creating positive,
Overshoot value chain just, and inclusive
circularity social impact
Harmonizing Sourcing 24/7
international low-carbon
standards and Shortcoming electricity and heat
regulation
Excelling in Establishing
cost and full supply-chain
regional transparency and
execution compliance
Securing raw Embracing
material and technology
machinery innovation and
supply flexibility
Source: McKinsey Sustainability Insights inspired by the 2015 article “Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet” in Science by
Will Steffen et al and the 2018 article “A good life for all within planetary boundaries” in Nature Sustainability by Daniel W. O’Neil et al.
McKinsey & Company
14 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

Minimizing environmental impacts beyond Embracing technology innovation and flexibility.
climate. A truly holistic approach will have to For cell manufacturers and OEMs to become
go far beyond producing low-carbon batteries. leaders in technology, process optimization, and
Stakeholders will have to take into account other modularity, they could aim to understand market
planetary boundaries to ensure the global battery dynamics, be flexible, and adopt promising
industry has a truly positive environmental impact innovations.
along the entire value chain. Adhering to the 2022
Kunming-Montreal biodiversity agreement (which Securing raw material and machinery supply.
includes a target to protect 30 percent of Earth’s Companies could explore long-term agreements,
surface by 2030) is especially important as it is a and co-funding, acquisition, and streaming
landmark in the global effort to safeguard natural arrangements with raw material and equipment
habitats. It can be viewed as the equivalent to the machinery companies to ensure adequate
Paris agreement for fighting climate change. supplies. This might help avoid supply shortages in
construction materials, skilled labor, and machinery
Creating positive, just, and inclusive social and thus mitigate the significant delays that often
impact. By ensuring health, safety, fair-trade occur in new production capacity projects today.
Exhibit 13
standards, human rights, and inclusive dialogues, Further, companies could consider securing
Ten transformational success factors are essential to build a resilient,
the battery industry could provide a positive impact access to capital, rigorously plan and execute
sustainable, and circular battery value chain by 2030. on many local communities around the globe as it complex permitting processes, and navigate import
scales up. The GBA has published various rulebooks and export bureaucracy to ensure a scheduled
on these dimensions. execution.
Sourcing 24/7 low-carbon electricity and heat. A Excelling in cost and regional execution. There
2022 report by the Long Duration Energy Storage have been tremendous improvements in battery
Council and McKinsey showed that traditional clean costs, manufacturing efficiency, and required
power purchase agreements only enable a 40 to capital expenditures over the past decade.
70 percent decarbonization of buyers’ electricity Companies will need to continue excelling in these
consumption while exposing them to market dimensions to remain competitive.
price risks stemming from renewables variability.
Companies might achieve better results with Harmonizing international standards and
time-matched green energy solutions, enabled by regulations. Diverging manufacturing standards
long-duration storage technologies, which can help and local regulations increase costs and pose
match supply and demand for electricity and heat barriers to faster scale-ups. GBA members see
during every hour of the year. The battery industry harmonization as one of the most critical goals
could become a frontrunner in accelerating deep to achieve around the globe. Private-public
decarbonization of the grid, despite its additional partnerships, as well as industry alliances, could
energy demand, if companies procured time- help significantly in orchestrating the alignment
matched clean energy to meet all their needs. process by fostering dialogue in multi-stakeholder
environments.
Establishing full supply-chain transparency and
compliance. Data availability and transparency In many respects, the current battery industry still
are fundamental requirements to ensure that the acts as a linear value chain in which products are
industry achieves its growth and ESG targets. This disposed of after use. Circularity, which focuses on
will require harmonized, credible, and trusted data. reusing or recycling materials, or both, can reduce
The Global Battery Alliance’s Battery Passport may GHG intensity while creating additional economic
be a resource here. value (Exhibit 14).
Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular 15

Exhibit 14
The battery value chain can transform from linear to circular.
The battery value chain can transform from linear to circular.
1 Active materials
2
2 Cell and pack
3 Application
1
4 Repair and refurbish
Battery 3
industry 5 Recycling (including urban mining)
4 6 Second life
7 Decentralized energy storage (eg solar power and storage)
6 5
12
8 Centralized storage
9 Vehicle to grid (including moving power storage)
7 Power 9 Transport
10 Smart charging
sector sector
11
11 Purpose-built urban EV
8
10 12 Shared mobility
Source: McKinsey Battery Insights, 2022
McKinsey & Company
A circular battery value chain can effectively couple Digital technology could increase circularity by
the transport and power sectors and is a foundation providing the transparency and data management
for transitioning to other sources of energy, such as required to create an efficient ecosystem in which
hydrogen and power-to-liquid, after 2025 to achieve batteries and critical materials can be traced
the target of limiting the increase in emissions through end-of-life.
to 1.5° C above pre-industrial levels. Despite the
accelerated emphasis on sustainability during the
COVID-19 pandemic, global CO2 emissions reached Improving recycling
an all-time high in 2021 and 2022—meaning that Battery manufacturers may find new
just over six years are left before the 1.5°C carbon opportunities in recycling as the market matures.
budget is depleted. This requires the highest Companies could create a closed-loop, domestic
urgency to act. supply chain that involves the collection, recycling,
reuse, or repair of used Li-ion batteries. The
Current regulations encourage circularity, and recycling industry alone could create a $6 billion
a shift to this model could bring many benefits. profit pool by 2040, by which time revenue could
For instance, companies would encounter fewer exceed $40 billion—more than a three-fold
supply bottlenecks resulting from the limited increase from 2030 values (Exhibit 15).
availability of raw materials. Circularity could
benefit the environment since companies would Current recycling business models are costly and
less frequently engage in virgin raw material mining heavily dependent on various factors, including
and refining. On the financial side, companies might battery design, process quality, and shifts
capture additional value if they reuse raw materials in market supply or raw-material demand. In
contained in end-of-life batteries. addition, operational challenges, such as limited
16 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular

Exhibit 14
The battery value chain can transform from linear to circular. Exhibit 15
Recycling could open new possibilities for battery manufacturers.
Recycling could open new possibilities for battery manufacturers.
Available battery material for recycling End of life EV battery recycling economics 2030,¹
by source, kt Production $ per ton of battery
scrap
7,300
Material
4,800–5,200
value
+20%
83%
per annum
3,400 Extraction 3,600–4,000
cost
1,400
800 Margin 800–
200 17% 1,600
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040
1Values represent an average across all battery types.
Source: McKinsey Battery Insights, 2022
McKinsey & Company
access to battery materials, inefficient processes, nameplate capacity of Li-ion cell factories exceeds
and low yields resulting from immature technologies, our market demand projections, there are several
remain persistent problems in the recycling sector. reasons why it will likely remain a supplier’s
market with temporary supply bottlenecks: not all
Regulatory incentives, as well as corporate announced projects will be executed, not all will
sustainability goals, provide companies with operate at full capacity, and many will be delayed.
strong reasons to improve their recycling efforts Further, battery cells are not sold on a free-
by optimizing access to feedstock, technological floating spot market but via long-term supplier
processes, and strategic partnerships throughout contracts. Despite rising local demand, China will
the battery value chain. Companies could also likely continue to have significant overproduction
improve recycling by drawing on knowledge gained capacity, while Europe and North America might
from lead acid battery recycling. not be able to meet their own local demand for cell
production.
Regional variations in the value chain Although companies in many locations are still
Value chain depth and concentration of the battery announcing new capacity, local growth comes
industry vary by country (Exhibit 16). While China with challenges. Management of the upstream
has many mature segments, cell suppliers are supply chain will remain critical given the nature
increasingly announcing capacity expansion in of regional raw material availability. Players in
Europe, the United States, and other major markets, the battery value chain who want to localize the
to be closer to car manufacturers. Partially because supply chain could mitigate these risks through
of recent regulatory changes, these new locations vertical integration, localized upstream value chain,
could provide almost 40 percent of global capacity strategic partnerships, and stringent planning of
in 2030. Although current globally-announced manufacturing ramp-ups.
Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular 17

Exhibit 16
Current global battery cell capacity announcements suggest a move toward
Current global battery cell capacity announcements suggest a move toward
regionalization in Europe and North America.
regionalization in Europe and North America.
Global announced nameplate capacity for production of Li-ion battery cells, GWh/year
6,500
6%
5,400 13%
6% Rest of Asia
North America
13% 19%
Europe
13% China
1,850 62%
7% 68%
9%
11%
74%
2022 260%25 2 6 0 % 30
Source: McKinsey Battery Insights—supply model, team analysis, Q4, 2022
McKinsey & Company
potentially create more than $400 billion in
The battery value chain is facing both significant
value-chain revenues by 2030, contribute to
opportunities and challenges due to its
up to 18 million jobs along the entire value chain
unprecedented growth. It is probably one of the
and around 70 GtCO2e avoided cumulative road
most ambitious scaling and ESG transformations
transport emissions from 2021 to 2050.
that this highly complex and global product value
chain has seen. It will require stringent efforts,
We strongly believe that a resilient, sustainable,
cross-industry collaboration, technological
and circular global battery value chain is not
disruptions, public-private-partnerships and
only possible but also admirable to achieve
increased research activities to succeed. If
sustainable inclusive growth.
mastered, however, the industry scale-up will
Jakob Fleischmann and Patrick Schaufuss are partners in McKinsey’s Munich office, where Martin Linder is a senior partner;
Mikael Hanicke is a senior partner in the Gothenburg office; Evan Horetsky is a partner in the Stockholm office; Dina Ibrahim
is a consultant in the London office; and Sören Jautelat is a partner in the Stuttgart office, where Lukas Torscht is a consultant
and Alexandre van de Rijt is an associate partner.
The authors wish to thank the Global Battery Alliance and its members for providing deep real-life insights and expertise to
this article. McKinsey has collaborated with the Global Battery Alliance since their inaugural report in 2019, A Vision for a
Sustainable Battery Value Chain in 2030: Unlocking the Full Potential to Power Sustainable Development and Climate Change
Mitigation. Further, the authors wish to thank Marcelo Azevedo, Nicolò Campagnol, Bernd Heid, Russell Hensley, Patrick
Hertzke, Evan Horetsky, Raphael Rettig, Daniel Schmid, Markus Wilthaner, and Ting Wu for their contributions to this article.
They also wish to thank the broader Automotive, Sustainability, Global Energy and Materials Practice partnership and their
solution colleagues at MineSpans, Battery Insights, Sustainability Insights, the McKinsey Platform for Climate Technologies,
and the McKinsey Center for Future Mobility for their input and guidance.
Copyright © 2023 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.
18 Battery 2030: Resilient, sustainable, and circular