JADE
:
MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
OCTOBER 2015

2 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report would not have been possible without the many organisations and individuals who have contributed their time, knowledge and
expertise. We would like to thank in particular Myanmar’s Ministry of Mines, Myanmar Gems Enterprise and the Myanmar Gems and Jewellery
Entrepreneurs Association for the data and assistance they have provided. We thank too the companies which have taken the time to share
information and their perspectives on the jade industry. These include large firms such as Myanma Economic Holdings Limited, Htoo Group,
KBZ, Max Myanmar, Myanmar Takaung and the Ruby Dragon Group as well as small-scale miners based in Hpakant. In analysing company
records, Global Witness has benefited from the invaluable support of OpenCorporates and the Open Knowledge Foundation.
In reviewing the environmental and social impacts of jade mining, we have been able to draw on research findings generously shared with
us by the Kachin Development Networking Group (KDNG).
We also appreciate the assistance we have had from a range of expert contributors including Tom Kramer, Mathieu Pellerin, Bertil Lintner,
Yeshua Moser-Puangswan and Kevin Woods.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 3
CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 5
Who’s who, and how much are they making? 10
Jade and armed conflict 14
Opportunities for reform and the role of Myanmar’s international partners 15
Recommendations 19
METHODOLOGY AND REPORT STRUCTURE 22
CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS IT WORTH AND HOW DOES IT WORK? 24
Introduction 24
The multi-billion dollar state secret 24
– What is the State’s take of Myanmar’s jade billions? And where does the money go? 27
– EITI: Window-dressing or game-changer? 28
Slicing up the pie 29
– Awarding jade licences: the official account 29
– Big hats and bribes: how to get your own jade mine 33
Playing the jade game: tax evasion, money-laundering, price-manipulation,
underselling and smuggling 34
China’s appetite for the stone of heaven 37
The rise of the machines 38
CHAPTER 2: WHO’S BENEFITTING? 40
Military and political leaders and their families 41
1. Retired Senior General Than Shwe 41
2. Minister for Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development Ohn Myint 44
3. Former Ruling Party General Secretary Maung Maung Thein 46
4. The tip of the iceberg? 49
Army companies 50
– Myanma Economic Holdings Limited 50
Crony companies 53
1. Ever Winner 53
2. KBZ Group 57
3. Asiaworld 60
4. Htoo Group – an unlikely transparency trailblazer? 61
Ceasefire groups 62
1. United Wa State Army / United Wa State Party 62
2. Ruby Dragon 67
International companies 69
1. The real thing – MEHL and Coke’s shared partner 69
2. Travels with my CAT, by Zaw Bo Khant 71
CHAPTER 3: WHO’S LOSING OUT? 73
Kachin’s stolen inheritance 75
The environmental and social collapse of Hpakant 78
Living the jade rush 80
CHAPTER 4: JADE AND ARMED CONFLICT 86
What’s it got to do with jade? 86
The backstory 87
Everything to lose – the licensed jade mining companies 89
A mafia in the mines – the Tatmadaw and jade 89
The KIA/KIO’s main artery 90
CONCLUSION 95
Glossary and acronyms 97
Appendix 1: Estimating the value of Myanmar’s jade industry 98
Appendix 2: Kachin Development Networking Group: ‘Solutions to current Destructive
Natural Resource Development Process and Related Conflicts’ 107
Endnotes 110

4 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Map of Myanmar and jade trading centres in China
KACHIN
INDIA Hpakant
Myitkyina
CHINA
Tengchong
BANGLADESH Laiza
Yingjiang
YUNNAN
Ruili
SAGAING
Kokang
Self-Administered
Zone
MYANMAR Wa
Self-Administered
Zone
CHIN SHAN
MANDALAY
Pa-O
RAKHINE MAGWAY Self-Administered
NAY Zone LAOS
PYI
TAW
KAYAH /
KARENNI
BAGO
THAILAND
MON
KAYIN /
AYEYARWADY YANGON KAREN
GUANGDONG PROVINCE
Sihui
Guangzhou
Pingzhou
HONG KONG
TANINTHARYI
CHINA

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARYi
Since 2011, Myanmar’s rebranded to the past. Companies owned by the family of
government has told the world it is former dictator Than Shwe and other notorious
transitioning from a pariah state run figures are creaming off vast profits from the
by a ruthless military dictatorship country’s most valuable natural resource, and the
to a civilian regime committed to world’s finest supply of a stone synonymous with
wholesale political and economic glitz and glamour. Meanwhile, very few revenues
reforms. reach the people of Kachin State, the site of the
Hpakant jade mines, or the population of Myanmar
In important respects, there has been real as a whole.
change. Oft-cited examples include the release of
Aung San Suu Kyi and other political prisoners, As the country approaches an historic election,
and the government’s peace talks with ethnic the importance of these findings to Myanmar’s
armed groups. But in other critical areas, the future is hard to overstate. Our investigations
reformist narrative bears little scrutiny. Nowhere show that the elites who between them have most
is this truer than in the jade sector. to lose from an open and fair future also have
ready access to a vast slush fund in the shape
Drawing on over a year of investigations, this of the jade sector. This raises urgent questions
report shows for the first time how a multi-billion for reformers and their international partners.
dollar trade in one of the planet’s most precious What is happening to all this jade money? Is it only
gemstones is tightly controlled by the same military being spent on real estate, fast cars and lavish
elites, US-sanctioned drug lords and crony parties, or is it being used for political purposes
companies that the government says it is consigning as well?
Traditionally associated with royalty
in China, jade has long been valued
above gold and silver and is now a
status symbol for the expanding
class of super-rich. In 2014, a
27 piece jadeite necklace sold in
Hong Kong for a record-breaking
US$27.44 million after a seven-way
bidder battle.
CREDIT: TYRONE SIU/Reuters/Corbis
i References for the points made in this section can be found in the main body of the report. The pull-out quotes are all from interviews by
Global Witness in 2014 and 2015.

6 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
“Hpakant is one of the most valuable places on earth because you can earn
billions from a very small area... and yet only a small number of people are
getting advantages.”
Community leader, Kachin State
The sums involved in what one industry
representative calls “the government’s big state
secret” are staggering. Until now the jade sector’s
worth has been almost impossible to determine.
However, based on new research and analysis,
Global Witness estimates that the value of
official jade production in 2014 alone was well
over the US$12 billion indicated by Chinese import
data, and appears likely to have been as much as
US$31 billion. To put it in perspective, this figure
equates to 48% of Myanmar’s official GDP and 46
times government expenditure on health.
Clearly, if openly, fairly and sustainably managed,
this industry could transform the fortunes of the
Kachin population and help drive development
across Myanmar. Instead, the people of Kachin
State are seeing their livelihoods disappear and
their landscape shattered by the intensifying
scramble for their most prized asset. Conditions
Kachin State in northern Myanmar is home to the world’s largest and
most valuable jade deposits. Instead of helping to drive much-needed in jade mines are often fatally dangerous, while
local development, and improve infrastructure and healthcare for those who stand in the way of the guns and
ordinary people, these riches are pocketed by a small and powerful elite.
machines face land grabs, intimidation and violence.
“Now jade mountains
disappear in just a
few days.”
Jade businessman
Government-licensed companies
have brought in machines to carry out
large-scale extraction in Hpakant, with
operations ramping up massively over
the past year. CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 7
These injustices stoke unrest and resentment in also initiated peace talks with the KIA/KIO. These
one of the country’s most volatile regions. The are promising moves but both risk falling short if
jade business is a significant driver of Myanmar’s they do not address directly the need for a fairer
most intractable armed conflict, which pits the
and more accountable system of managing the
central government against the Kachin
country’s most important natural resource.
Independence Army / Kachin Independence
Organisation (KIA/KIO). The industry generates
Western governments that support the government,
funds for both sides in a war which has claimed
especially the US, have a key role to play here.
thousands of lives and seen 100,000 people
With a range of sanctions imposed on individuals
displaced since it reignited in 2011.
named in this report, and a leading role in the EITI
process, the US is uniquely well placed to help
While the situation is dire, the opportunities for
take the jade trade out of the hands of military
change are real. Government reformers have
signed Myanmar up to the Extractive Industries hardliners and crony companies. This report
Transparency Initiative (EITI), an international spells out precisely why it must use that leverage
framework for combating corruption. They have without delay.
A call for change from Kachin State
In October 2014, 4,923 people in the jade mining township of Hpakant signed a letter to President Thein
Sein demanding an end to the abuses by jade mining companies. The letter details devastating
environmental and social impacts caused by company activities:
“As part of jade mining activities in Hpakant, a limited number of
capitalists have been granted permits for blocks, whereas local ethnic
groups have been granted no jade blocks. Although certain companies are
affiliated to ethnic groups, such affiliation is in title only and these
companies are dominated by foreign nationals.”
“The mining companies are dynamiting the hills and mountains to allow
exploration activities prior to the expiry of their contracts, and they are
acting solely for their own benefit in the excavation of valuable jade via
short-term rather than long-term processes. This poses a serious potential
health hazard to residents, and causes a wide range of diseases or fatalities.”
“Companies do not systematically stabilise sites where they have undertaken
deep excavations and created reservoirs. As a result, heavy rains cause
reservoirs to burst, and reservoirs are also sometimes destroyed
intentionally, leading to the death of cattle and loss of property. However, the companies never take responsibility
for such incidents.”
“The huge vehicles used by the companies have left the streets congested, and accidents are frequent.”
“Although valuable resources, priceless gems, forests, and gold are all vanishing due to excavations by
companies equipped with machinery, the public does not benefit from these activities. Conversely, people
are suffering as a result of health hazards and are even dying due to the air pollution created by the dynamite
mining of the companies.”
“Issuing grants to these companies to work on blocks will lead to a rapid decline in the state of local residents’
properties as well as the region’s valuable jade, leading to serious repercussions for the next generation.”

8 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Life in the margins of Hpakant’s jade rush
A single mother of three children who has lived in Maw Sizar – in the Hpakant area – since 1991,
described to local researchers the impact of Kyaing International, a jade mining company owned by
the family of former military dictator Than Shwe:
“Up until around 2005 I had good opportunities to make a living for my family through
small-scale jade trading. When the company arrived, however, I was told I must leave
my house and accept one million kyats compensation. I did not wish to accept, but then
backhoe diggers came and destroyed my home. This was the rainy season and my
family and I had no shelter. Many others were in the same situation. In 2012 the
company had to suspend its operations and I had opportunities once again to trade
small amounts of jade dug in the company’s concession by artisanal miners. But then
in 2014 the suspension was lifted, the police came and chased the small-scale miners
away and the company returned to exploit the area once more.”
Local people who traditionally made their living from jade have been systematically squeezed out by government-licensed concessionaires. Some
make a living picking for pieces of jade in waste dumped by the companies. CREDIT: Minzayar
“Out of all the money made [from jade] if even 1% was spent on healthcare,
education and infrastructure in Kachin, it would make an immense difference.
But the benefits just go to a handful.”
Community leader, Kachin State

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 9
.
“The Kachin State government must have the right to manage the natural
resources in the state. Moreover, the local government and the local people
must get involved in the management.”
KDNG / Kachin State Natural Resources Development Policy Discussion Paper
As companies ramp up mining activity, life-threatening landslides The colossal vehicles used by jade companies pose a daily threat
are increasingly common. At this site, at least 20 people were killed to those living and working in Hpakant. Here, a mother holds the
in January 2015 when heavy rains caused a waste dump collapse. picture of her late son, killed in an accident while searching for
CREDIT: Minzayar jade in a company waste pile. CREDIT: Minzayar
Frantic jade extraction has destroyed Hpakant’s environment, Drug user in Myitkyina, Kachin State – heroin and methamphetamine
turning its mountains into craters, polluting its lakes and streams, use is rampant amongst jade miners in Hpakant, and local people
felling its forests and – as shown in this picture taken in 2014 – are increasingly taking a stand against the harm the spread of
causing flooding in Hpakant Town. CREDIT: KDNG drugs is doing to their communities. CREDIT: Adam Dean

10 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Who’s who, and how much are In addition to the family of former dictator Than
Shwe, they include:
they making?
– Senior ruling party figures, notably:
For years, Myanmar’s jade sector has been mired
• Minister for Livestock, Fisheries and Rural
in secrecy. Ordinary people have been unable Development, and former army commander in
to access even basic data on which companies Kachin State, Ohn Myint;
hold mining licences; who those companies’ real • former General Secretary of the Union
owners are; how licences are allocated; what the Solidarity and Development Party, retired
terms of their contracts are; what they are paying army general Maung Maung Thein;
the government; and how much they are producing. • Deputy Minister for Social Welfare, Relief and
Resettlement and former army Brigadier-
Because of this, little attention has so far been General Phone Swe;
paid to who is really benefitting from the jade • and Deputy Minister for Communications and
Information Technology, and former major
rush, or how this sits alongside the reform
general and director of defence procurement
efforts. This report aims to begin to change that,
at the Ministry of Defence, Win Than.
identifying for the first time key players behind
the companies awarded jade concessions by the
Global Witness research indicates that these
government.
figures are making vast amounts from jade. The
Than Shwe, Maung Maung Thein and Ohn Myint
Myanmar’s jade licensing system is wide open to
families hold multiple concessions which between
corruption and cronyism. The main concessions
them generated pre-tax sales of US$220 million
are in government-controlled areas of Hpakant
at the 2014 jade emporium (the official government
Township, Kachin State, and blocks are awarded
jade sale), and US$67 million at the 2013 emporium.
through a centrally-controlled process which multiple
Another company which Global Witness believes
industry sources say favours companies connected
to be part of the Than Shwe family group posted
to powerful figures and high-ranking officials. In sales of another US$150 million across the 2014
the words of one jade businessman, “if there is a and 2013 emporiums combined. As the country
big hat involved [in a bid], they will surely get it”. heads towards election, when many fear hardliners
Our list of those involved in the jade trade today may finance sectarian violence and dirty tricks,
reads like a who’s who from the darkest days of Myanmar’s citizens urgently need to know where
junta rule in Myanmar. the jade money is going.
General Than Shwe Minister Ohn Myint Wei Hsueh Kang Aike Htwe
Jade companies linked to former dictator Retired Senior General Than Shwe, former army commander of Kachin State and serving minister Ohn
Myint, drug lord Wei Hsueh Kang and Ever Winner Company supremo Aike Htwe recorded around US$430 million in pre-tax sales at the 2014
official government jade sale alone.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 11
Minister for Livestock, Fisheries
and Rural Development Ohn
Myint was previously Myanmar’s
Northern Commander, the top
general in Kachin State. He
became notorious for a public
speech in 2014 in which he
threatened to slap faces, and
suggested that anyone who
opposed the government would
be jailed. CREDIT: DVB
– Myanmar’s army – the Tatmadaw holds official – ‘Crony’ companies – firms that emerged and
stakes in the jade sector, primarily through its prospered under the Than Shwe military junta
are key players in the jade business. Most notable
companies Myanma Economic Holdings Limited
are the Asia World group established by Kokang
and Myanmar Economic Corporation. Global
drug lord Lo Hsing-Han and the Htoo Group run
Witness’ analysis of 2014 emporium data suggests
by ‘number one crony’ Tay Za, both of whom are
these companies sold the highest quality jade,
subject to US sanctions. Much more significant
commanding an average price of over US$13,000
but virtually unknown is the powerful Ever Winner
per kilogram. Between them, official emporium group of companies, which appears to encompass
sales of army companies amount to US$180 12 jade mining firms. The Ever Winner firms
between them made around US$190 million in
million in 2014 and US$100 million in 2013. These
official emporium sales in 2014 and just over
firms are regarded as an off-budget fund for the
US$120 million in 2013. Global Witness research
Commander-in-Chief. Many people in Kachin State
indicates that its owners are connected to politically
believe jade revenues are helping to underwrite
influential tycoons including Aung Ko Win, the
the army’s war against the Kachin Independence
head of KBZ Group and Myanmar’s biggest bank,
Army / Kachin Independence Organisation and media mogul Kyaw Win, the operator of
(KIA/KIO). Skynet satellite TV.
“If military families do not have a jade mining company the others will kick
them out. Those without one will be seen as black sheep. They will not be
speaking the same language.”
Former official

12 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Global Witness research
indicates that infamous drug
lord Wei Hsueh Kang, a long
time financier of the United
Wa State Army ethnic armed
group, is behind a group of jade
companies that are arguably
the most dominant in Hpakant.
– Drug lords – Wei Hsueh Kang is a narcotics sector can also pose major problems for global
kingpin and long-time financier of the United Wa businesses operating in the country.
State Army / United Wa State Party (USWA/UWSP)
ethnic armed group who has a US$2 million US For example, the Coca-Cola Company and
government bounty on his head. There is strong Caterpillar Inc. have both recently been caught
evidence that he controls a group of companies out as new information on their in-country partners
that are now arguably the dominant players in and associates has come to light. Despite a seven
Myanmar’s jade industry. Companies run by Wei figure due diligence process, Coca-Cola failed to
Hsueh Kang and other UWSA/UWSP-related identify their local partner’s interests in the jade
figures have been heavyweights in the jade industry, including a long-running association
business since the 1990s. The introduction of US with army company Myanma Economic Holdings
sanctions forced a shuffling of the pack in the Limited. The drinks giant stated in a letter that
mid-2000s, but Global Witness investigations have “The Coca-Cola Company has been transparent
identified five firms we believe are now the front about our joint venture and operations in Myanmar
for Wei Hsueh Kang’s jade ventures. These and we continue to go above and beyond the
companies recorded pre-tax sales of US$100 Department of State’s Reporting Requirements on
million across the 2013 and 2014 government Responsible Investment in Burma.” Caterpillar,
gems emporiums. meanwhile, has hosted in at least five countries
the front man for a group of jade companies
The extensive involvement of this range of Global Witness believes to be controlled by drug
individuals and organisations in the jade trade lord Wei Hsueh Kang. In a response to questions
should sound alarm bells for all those with a the company said that its due diligence had not
stake in building a peaceful and prosperous future demonstrated that the companies named by
for Myanmar. These are not just political concerns, Global Witness are owned or controlled by “a
either. The secrecy and abuse at play in the jade sanctioned party”.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 13
Caterpillar Inc. is one of the many international machinery suppliers providing equipment for Hpakant’s massive mining operations. Global
Witness research reveals that its local dealership is linked to a group of companies which appears to be controlled by US-sanctioned narcotics
kingpin Wei Hsueh Kang.
Stone marker on a bridge on the road to
Hpakant, stating that it was built by jade
mining firm Xie Family and US-sanctioned
army company Myanma Economic Holdings
Limited (MEHL). Coca Cola’s due diligence
checks failed to pick up their local director’s
stake in Xie Family, or the jade company’s
long-running business relationship with MEHL.

14 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Jade and armed conflict personal fortunes through extortion of the
jade business, and so have a reason to justify
their deployment and keep the money flowing.
• Jade is the main source of income for the KIA/
Jade is inextricably linked to the conflict in Kachin
KIO. This makes the battle for control of jade
State. Watching licensed companies controlled
revenues a strategic priority for both sides in
by their worst enemies gobble up their natural
the conflict.
inheritance is a source of simmering resentment
amongst the Kachin people. As some put it, “the
tree is in our garden, but we are not allowed to
eat the fruit”. Such perceptions are deep-rooted
“All of this is a reason for the conflict.
and an important part of the nationalist narrative
And it will happen into the future too
that drives Kachins to distrust or actively resist
because the government knows
central government control. The relationship
Hpakant is the biggest jade mining
between jade and conflict matters for at least
area in the world. Local people see
three other reasons:
jade but they get no benefit.”
• The army families and companies that own Jade company owner
many of the jade mines would lose out in an
equitable peace deal. They have the financial
incentive and possibly the political reach to keep It is very unlikely that a peace agreement that
the conflict going until long-term central does not meaningfully address the question of
government control over Hpakant can be assured. who manages and benefits from Kachin State’s
• The Tatmadaw officers in Kachin State are making jade will be a lasting one.
Locals’ sense of injustice over their systematic exclusion from the jade sector feeds into the Kachin State conflict, as does the fact that both the
KIA/KIO and the Tatmadaw (government army) see control of jade as a strategic priority.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 15
Opportunities for reform and the Kachin State. It is critical that they focus on what
role of Myanmar’s international is happening in the jade sector.
partners
The US and other donors have three main
channels of influence to the jade sector: EITI,
peace negotiations, and sanctions.
International partner governments have invested
heavily in supporting the reform process in
Myanmar. This is the right thing to do, but donors
need to make sure their efforts deliver results for “Jade is the least transparent
Myanmar’s people as well as warm relations with business in the world.”
its leaders. Reform of the jade business is one of
Local community leader, Kachin State
the issues that they should use as a benchmark
for future aid disbursements. To date jade has not
figured in the dialogue between Nay Pyi Taw and
EITI
its new friends – this is a gaping blind spot which
must be addressed.
In 2014 President Obama claimed that “if Burma Under President Thein Sein, the Myanmar
succeeds, we will have gained a new partner government has taken the important step of
without having fired a shot”. Certainly the approach signing up to the Extractive Industries Transparency
taken by the US government will be pivotal. In Initiative (EITI), an internationally recognised
practice, the US is the ultimate international framework for opening up the oil, gas and mining
arbiter on Myanmar’s political transition and both businesses. The US, UK, Norway, Australia and
Washington and Nay Pyi Taw governments know EU countries have all strongly supported this
it. US diplomats have spoken up strongly for ethnic move. How EITI is implemented in the jade sector
minority rights, and have sought to play a will be a key test of the government’s commitment
constructive role in resolving the conflict in to reform.
The EITI could bring much-needed
transparency to the country’s most
valuable extractive industry, if the
government implements its standards
effectively. But locals have questioned
whether the government is willing to
live up to its promises when it comes
to jade.

16 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
The EITI could allow the public to see which
companies are being given access to jade
“That’s why the government won’t
concessions and who these companies are
invite representatives of the jade
ultimately owned and controlled by. It could also
business to join this discussion [about
reveal the amounts of jade being produced and
the government take of jade revenues derived EITI] because they are afraid that all
both from tax and royalty receipts and through the corruption and misery will come
arrangements with state-owned enterprises. The out and the world will see.”
publication of such data, combined with requirements
Jade industry representative
to protect civil society space, could allow local
groups to hold companies and officials to account
for corruption or financial mismanagement.
The companies licensed by
Myanmar’s government to
mine jade make billions of
dollars, both through
official sales at this
government gems
emporium and through
smuggling direct to China.
Even basic information
on who these companies
are and where jade
revenues are really going
is kept under wraps,
however.
Conversely, if the scheme’s principles are not detailing its sales revenues and the taxes it has
applied to the jade business as a matter of paid in respect of each of its jade concessions, in
urgency, the opportunity would be lost and EITI’s line with EITI standards. Another major jade mining
credibility in Myanmar severely damaged. player, the Ruby Dragon Group, has disclosed
There are signs of positive movement, and from limited information on its ownership, including the
some unexpected quarters. Some government names and national identification numbers of its
officials have begun to show a commendable shareholders; details which allow the backgrounds
willingness to make the sector more open, of these individuals to be checked.
sharing data on policies, practices and, most
significantly, which companies control which These chinks of light show that there is nothing to
mines. This is an important first step towards stop jade companies in Myanmar from being more
the EITI goal of publication of the identities of the transparent, as long as they have necessary
individuals who ultimately control jade and other support and incentives to do it. In the coming
extractive companies. months Myanmar will publish its first EITI report,
and the government has the chance to show that it
Some of the big companies, too, have provided is serious about reform by making public key data
data that needs to be released under EITI. A on jade licence terms, licence holder identities,
surprising early champion of transparency is production levels and revenues received. The US
Htoo Group, owned by Myanmar’s most famous and other donors, including the World Bank and
crony tycoon, Tay Za, which has made an early the UK, should use their influence to help support
disclosure of data on its jade mining businesses, this outcome.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 17
Peace negotiations on what future natural resource management
policies might look like, and an excerpt from a
recent proposal by the Kachin Development
Networking Group is included as an appendix
Another key potential opening concerns the peace
to this report. Both sides in the conflict should
negotiations between the central government and
urgently build on these foundations by consulting
the KIA/KIO. As with EITI, the US and other western
with a diverse range of civil society groups across
governments are heavily invested in this process.
Kachin State, and beginning a dialogue on a new
Given the current situation and the history of jade
model of shared ownership, management and
and armed conflict in Kachin, the government and
revenue distribution for jade.
its partners need to recognise the reality that a
peace deal that once again avoids this question
will not last.
“A ‘bottom to up’ development process
To his credit, the minister overseeing peace talks,
engages local people in decision
Aung Min, has publicly highlighted the need for
making and provides benefits to the
wealth sharing to resolve armed conflict in Myanmar.
local citizens. If people are not
To date, however, there has been no meaningful
engaged in the process of managing
discussion of what this would mean in the Kachin
their own natural resources, more
context.
political problems will emerge and
peace in the country may be affected.”
While the onus is on the government and the KIA/
KIO to take the initiative, it is crucial that local KDNG / Kachin State Natural Resources Development
voices can feed into this debate. Kachin civil society Policy Discussion Paper
organisations have already begun developing ideas
In November 2014 around
2,000 people in the jade town
of Hpakant staged a protest
against abuses by the
government-licensed mining
companies. Some demanded
that all company operations
be suspended until the
conflict in Kachin State is
resolved. CREDIT: KDNG

18 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
US sanctions Global Witness does not believe that all of these
sanctions should be maintained forever. But neither
should they be discarded too hastily; nor treated as
a giant ‘on/off’ switch whereby stringent measures
Both the peace process and the EITI are magnets
suddenly give way to no safeguards at all. As the US
for western donor funding. This brings with it
excellent opportunities for donors to push for government knows well, from its experience
substantive change, but also risks of them ducking in Liberia for example, a process of measured,
difficult issues that get in the way of the positive incremental lifting of sanctions in post-conflict
narrative of Myanmar’s transition that some countries can provide one of the best guarantees of
western capitals want to broadcast. Both the meaningful reform of natural resource industries that
Kachin conflict and jade are difficult issues. are enmeshed with armed violence and corruption.
Neither can be dodged or deferred.
The opportunity is there for the US, other governments
The US also has the unique leverage of sanctions. and international donors and their reformist
Its JADE Act, which prohibits the import of jade, partners in the Myanmar government to agree a
was originally designed to stop members of “the set of measures and milestones by which, as the
Burmese [Than Shwe] regime and its supporters jade industry becomes more open, and the benefits
[financing] their ongoing violations of human rights, are shared far more equitably, the sanctions are
undemocratic policies and military activities”. progressively scaled back. Some suggestions on
Our investigation shows that some of these same what these specific measures should include are
people remain the main beneficiaries of the jade
set out in the recommendations section below.
business. The US Treasury also has sanctions on
‘crony’ tycoons as well as sanctions targeting drug
lords. Again, both groups are well represented at
jade’s top table.
It is yet to be seen whether
Myanmar will become
a foreign policy success
for President Obama’s
administration, but if the
US uses its influence to
support a more transparent
and fair approach to jade
this could make an
important contribution to
development and prospects
for peace.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 19
Myanmar’s international partners have the opportunity to support reform of the country’s most valuable natural resource industry so that it
benefits local people and supports sustainable development. CREDIT: Minzayar
Recommendations revenues from jade concessions (broken
down by project); other revenues from jade,
including revenues from government shares
of state-owned enterprises; full contract and
To the Government of the Republic
licence terms (including environmental and
of the Union of Myanmar:
social protections); and arrangements with
state-owned enterprises.
• Develop new ownership, management and
• In line with EITI recommendations, require
revenue sharing arrangements with Kachin
jade concession holders and companies bidding
State for jade and other natural resources in
for concessions to disclose publicly the
conjunction with the KIA/KIO and local civil
identities of the individuals by whom they are
society groups, as part of a comprehensive
ultimately owned and/or controlled (the
peace agreement. Ensure that these
‘ultimate beneficial owners’). In addition
arrangements maximise the social and require disclosure of any associations with
economic benefits for the local and national public office holders (past or present), and
population, taking account of the needs of any past record of corruption or environmental
both current and future generations. or human rights abuse together with details of
• Prioritise full implementation of EITI in the measures taken to address such issues.
jade sector. As such, publish data on: jade • Make the above EITI provisions on data
licence bidding processes; who current disclosure a requirement of new mining,
licence-holders are and what licences they gemstone and other laws governing the jade
hold; jade production volumes; government business.

20 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
• Immediately review and revise bidding to ensure they include environmental and
processes for jade concessions in consultation social protections in line with international
with Kachin and Myanmar civil society to standards including: the UN Human Rights
make them open and fair. This should include Council’s Guiding Principles for Business and
introducing explicit protections against Human Rights; the Voluntary Principles on
conflicts of interest and corruption which Security and Human Rights; the International
take account of the identities and histories of Finance Corporation’s Sustainability Framework;
bidders.ii and the International Council on Mining and
• Reinstate the company shareholder details in Metals’ Sustainable Development Principles.
Myanmar’s company registry, and publish Amongst other measures, a grievance redress
additional information on the ultimate beneficial mechanism should be established, in a form
ownership of companies. agreed after public consultation within Kachin
• Require the accounts of state-owned State, with effective penalties for companies
enterprises (including entities that are which fail to comply with environmental and
partly or wholly owned by the army) to be social protection requirements.
independently audited and details of all jade • Establish an independent monitor to ensure
revenue receipts and transfers to the that environmental and social protections are
government to be published. implemented promptly and fully, with regular
• Publish a detailed breakdown of government public reports on breaches identified and how
expenditure so as to allow local people to they are being addressed.
track where jade money ends up. • Pass legislation that prohibits the military,
• Review and revise existing laws to bring them police and other security services, and their
into compliance with the EITI Civil Society individual serving officers, from establishing,
Protocol and to ensure that civil society and operating, or exercising beneficial ownership
the media are free to hold the government over companies.
and companies to account over jade sector
management and operations without fear of
physical, legal, or other forms of retribution.
To all donor governments,
• Simplify and clarify taxes on jade, with input
international financial institutions,
from the private sector, local government and
civil society and strengthen revenue collection and other partners of the Myanmar
systems to reduce tax evasion, particularly at government:
the mine site.
• Investigate jade-related corruption involving • Make funding and other forms of support to
army, police, government officials and the Myanmar government and (in the case of
companies; prosecute perpetrators and hold the US) the lifting of sanctions conditional on
to account those with command responsibility. delivery of the above reforms.
• Cancel any jade mining licences obtained • Provide technical support to the government’s
through corruption or held by companies that efforts to implement EITI, particularly with
have broken the law or contributed to human reference to reforms of the jade sector, and to
rights or environmental abuses. efforts to incorporate EITI principles into laws
• Review and revise laws, regulations, policies on natural resource management.
governing the jade sector, and the terms of • Provide technical support to the government,
licences and contracts for jade concessions KIA/KIO and Kachin civil society’s development
ii For detailed recommendations on preventing corruption in the award of oil, gas and mining licences, see the ‘Citizens’ Checklist’ set out in Global
Witness, ‘Rigged’, January 2012; available at https://www.globalwitness.org/reports/rigged/.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 21
of new ownership, management and revenue terms (including any environmental or social
sharing arrangements for the management of provisions). State-owned enterprises, including
jade and other natural resources as part of a army companies, should disclose their stakes
comprehensive peace agreement. in jade mining and trading ventures and transfers
• Support, financially and politically, civil society of money to other branches of government in
organisations in Kachin State and across line with EITI.
Myanmar that are working to increase • Immediately review existing mining operations
accountability in the management of natural and halt activities that breach national or
resources. international laws and standards on
environmental, social, human rights and
worker rights.
• Establish and implement policies and
To the KIA/KIO:
procedures to minimise and mitigate
environmental, social and human rights
• Publish data on management of the jade
impacts of jade mining operations, in line with
sector by KIA/KIO authorities, in line with
international standards including: the UN
EITI, including details of the KIA/KIO taxation
Human Rights Council’s Guiding Principles
regime, expenditure and oversight.
for Business and Human Rights; the Voluntary
• Draw up policy proposals for how Kachin
Principles on Security and Human Rights; the
State would manage the jade sector under
International Finance Corporation’s Sustainability
a federal system, with input from a diverse
Framework; and the International Council on
range of civil society groups in Kachin State.
Mining and Metals’ Sustainable Development
• Investigate jade-related corruption involving
Principles.
KIA/KIO officers and officials, prosecute
perpetrators and hold to account those with
command responsibility.
To current or prospective
international investors in Myanmar:
To jade mining and trading companies:
• Carry out rigorous due diligence on existing
• Disclose data in line with EITI requirements. or prospective local partners particularly
This includes: tax and other payments to those with potential connections to the
government from jade concession holders gemstone sector.
(broken down by project); names and identifying • Publish the names and national identity numbers
information (including national identification of all individuals who own and/or control
numbers) of the individuals who own and/or stakes in local ventures, together with
control them; and jade contract and licence background information on these individuals.

22 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
METHODOLOGY AND REPORT STRUCTURE
Global Witness carried out the research and Data analysis:
analysis on which this report is based between
February 2014 and September 2015. Global Witness has reviewed, analysed and used a
wide range of data sets for this report including:
We gathered information through meetings and
correspondence with over 400 public officials, • Ministry of Mines data on jade licence holders,
industry representatives and community members including detailed jade concession maps for
across Kachin State, Yangon, Nay Pyi Taw and the Hpakant area. These maps are reproduced
Mandalay in Myanmar, and various locations in China. in Chapter 1 of this report.
• Company records made available in DICA’s
Amongst others in Myanmar, Global Witness has online company registry at http://dica.gov.
met with and/or exchanged correspondence with: mm.x-aas.net/. In 2014, data including the
• The Ministry to the President’s Office. names, identification numbers and addresses
• The Directorate of Investment and Company of directors and the names of shareholders
Administration (DICA) which is responsible for for all Myanmar companies was published
the country’s company registry. through this website. This information had
• The Myanmar Gems and Jewellery Entrepreneurs been taken down by the end of 2014, and it
Association, the industry body which represents was subsequently partially reinstated in
jade companies in Myanmar. mid-2015. However, OpenCorporates, the
• Army companies Myanma Economic Holdings world’s largest open database of companies,
Limited and Myanmar Economic Corporation. has collected and published the records made
• Leading private companies including the Htoo available in 2014. The Open Knowledge
Group, KBZ, Max Myanmar, the Ruby Dragon Foundation and OpenCorporates supported
Group, the Ever Winner group, Myanmar Global Witness in analysing these records.
Takaung, Xie Family and Gold Uni. • Various detailed breakdowns of sales at the
• Multinationals the Coca-Cola Company and 50th, 51st and 52nd gems emporiums (geared
Caterpillar Inc., and a representative of towards foreign buyers) which were held,
another major machine company. respectively, in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Alongside
• The Kachin Independence Army / Kachin this we reviewed summary data on jade
Independence Organisation. sales at the emporiums held between 2002
• Members of the upper and lower houses of and 2012, and two emporiums open only to
Myanmar’s parliament. Myanmar traders that were held in January
• Jade company staff, independent jade traders, and October 2014. Analysing this information,
carriers and ‘hand-pickers’. alongside official production data, Chinese
In addition, we have interviewed a range of jade import statistics and industry estimates of the
traders and industry representatives in China. informal sector, Global Witness has produced
new estimates for the value of Myanmar’s jade
Given the sensitivity of the issues, we do not industry and total sales figures for key players
reveal the identities of most interviewees in this in the business. Details of these calculations
report, and the references to meetings with them are set out in Appendix 1 of this report.
in the endnotes have been coded. • The Htoo Group has also provided details of
each of the jade blocks it holds, together with

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 23
levels of production and the associated sales • Chapter 2: ‘Who’s Benefitting?’: This identifies
and tax figures for each of these blocks. This the powerful individuals behind some of the
project level data has fed into Global Witness’ biggest government-licensed players in the
economic analysis of the jade industry. jade industry. This section is separated into
• Information gathered by the Kachin four sub-categories representing the four
Development Networking Group on the social types of companies Global Witness has identified
and environmental impacts of jade mining in as reaping the greatest benefits: companies
Kachin State. We have used this data alongside owned by army families; army companies;
Global Witness interviews carried out across ‘crony’ companies’; and ceasefire group
Myitkyina, Hpakant and the surrounding areas companies.
to build up a picture of the effect the industry • Chapter 3: ‘Who’s Losing Out?’: This section
is having on inhabitants of Kachin State. considers the impact the government’s current
approach to jade mining is having on the
Report structure: inhabitants of Kachin State, both ethnic
Kachin and members of other ethnic groups
This report sets out the main findings of Global such as the Shan, Bamar and Rakhine, all of
Witness’ investigations into the jade sector, whom are suffering devastating social and
divided into four chapters: environmental impacts.
• Chapter 4: ‘Jade and Armed Conflict’: This
• Chapter 1: ‘What is it Worth and How Does it section reviews the linkages between the jade
Work?’: This sets out Global Witness’ estimates industry and the long-running armed conflict
of the value of Myanmar’s jade sector, and between the Myanmar government and the
briefly explains how jade licences are awarded Kachin Independence Army / Kachin
and how the stone is mined and traded – as Independence Organisation.
well as the corruption and mismanagement at
different stages of the process.

24 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
CHAPTER 1: WHAT’S IT WORTH AND HOW
DOES IT WORK?
“How come we are LDC [Least Developed Country]? A country so rich in oil, gas
and gems should not be an LDC. For the answer you need to look at the military.
The country is being stripped of all its resources. We shouldn’t be that poor.
No way! The key issue is transparency!”
Former official1
Introductioniii With the possibility of both a new government and
a peace agreement with the KIA/KIO around the
corner, licensed companies are ramping up their
mining operations, using massive machines to
Hpakant in Myanmar’s northern Kachin State
extract all the jade they can now, in case a change
holds the world’s most valuable jade deposits.
in the political climate leaves them out in the cold.
However, our investigations reveal that the
government system for allocating and managing
jade mines is fraught with corruption, allowing
The multi-billion dollar state
a powerful elite to cream off most of the profits.
Little, if any, of the vast sums generated are spent secret
on the infrastructure, health and education that
the people of Kachin State and Myanmar as a
whole deserve. Described as Myanmar’s “big state secret”, even
basic information on the jade industry has long
been kept under wraps.2
Chinese government import data for 2014 indicates
that the category of gemstone imports from Myanmar
that covers – and overwhelmingly comprises – jade
was worth US$12.3 billion.3 This is an astonishing
sum. However, as explained below, numerous
industry sources have told Global Witness that
50%-80% of jade is smuggled straight over the
Myanmar-China border (see next page for map
of smuggling routes used). Chinese customs
data supports these claims, showing that less
than a third of Myanmar’s official jade production
For over 250 years, the Kachin Hills have been famed as the home entered China legally, even though China is where
of the biggest and most valuable jade mines in the world. Of the
almost all Myanmar’s jade ends up.4 This suggests
many colours and varieties of jade which can be mined, the most
highly prized is always imperial green jadeite from Myanmar; that the US$12.3 billion figure, huge though it is,
prices for flawless stones can approach those of diamonds.
significantly underestimates the true value of
CREDIT: Adam Dean
Myanmar’s jade production.
iii ‘Jade’ is a generic term for two distinct gemstones: jadeite and nephrite. Jadeite is rarer and more valuable than nephrite. Myanmar is the
world’s dominant supplier of jadeite, and it produces the highest quality stones. The specific gemstone referred to in this report is jadeite,
but we use the term jade throughout the text.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 25
Jade-carrying routes -
Upper Myanmar
INDIA
Kachin
State
Sagaing
Division CHINA
Shan
State
KEY
Hpakant jade mines combined gov. agencies checkpoints
jade route via roads Tatmadaw checkpoints
jade route via rivers Tatmadaw & police checkpoints
Magway jade route via paths police checkpoints
Division
jade route via railways KIA checkpoint
rivers state & division boundaries
0 50 KM

26 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Global Witness has therefore undertaken a new ‘imperial’ and medium value ‘commercial’ grade
and in-depth analysis of the value of the jade jade as a share of overall jade production. We
business that draws on a range of unpublished have therefore used the estimate of the respective
data. Our estimates put the value of Myanmar’s percentages of imperial, commercial and utility
official jade production in 2014 alone as high as (low) grade jade employed by Harvard Ash Center
US$31 billion, and up to US$122.8 billion over the and Proximity Designs in their 2013 assessment
last decade (2005 to 2014). To put this in perspective, of the business.8 This estimate is based on
US$31 billion equates to 48% of Myanmar’s interviews with industry leaders.
entire official GDP.5 This breaks down to at least
US$21,000 per person in Kachin State where jade
The opacity of Myanmar’s jade business means
is mined and up to 46 times the country’s total
that available data is incomplete and any valuation
health expenditure for 2014-15.6
involves choosing between different methodologies
and assumptions. It is therefore worth highlighting
How can these figures be so high and how are
that another, completely different method of
they calculated?
assessing 2014 jade production also yields an
estimate of well over US$30 billion. If one calculates
Good quality jade is extraordinarily valuable and
the average price per kilogram of jade imports as
Myanmar is the world’s main source. The 2014
indicated by the Chinese government in 2014 and
Myanmar Gems Emporium – the primary official
combines it with Myanmar government production
government jade sale which is geared towards
figures for the same year, this suggests a value of
international buyers – featured jade that sold for
almost US$38 billion.
as much as US$2.89 million per kilogram. For the
very best stones, values can approach those of
Finally, since all our estimates are based on
diamonds, carat for carat.7
official production data, they take no account of
the significant portion of jade output which is kept
Our calculations are described in detail in Appendix
entirely off the books and never recorded by the
1 to this report. In summary, they take Myanmar
Myanmar authorities at the mines. Consequently,
government jade production data and combine it
our calculations may significantly understate the
with price data derived from a detailed breakdown
real value of Myanmar’s total jade production.
of sales from the 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium.
They also factor in aggregated sales figures from
All of these estimates are just that – estimates.
an October 2014 jade fair for low grade stones for
the domestic market, together with data from the Our intention, in publishing some specific figures,
2013 Myanmar Gems Emporium and emporiums based on the incomplete data available, is not so
held in previous years. much to have the last word on the value of Myanmar’s
jade business as to trigger a debate and encourage
Rampant smuggling means that the Myanmar the full disclosure of the information the public
Gems Emporium sales figures significantly needs to make more definitive assessments on an
understate the percentage of highest value ongoing basis.
The mines in the Maw Sizar area of Hpakant are famed for the high quality jade they produce. For the most sought after mines, bidders depend
on high-level connections and bribery to secure official licences. CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 27
What is the State’s take of Myanmar’s jade billions? And, where does the
money go?
“The government wants to keep [jade data] secret because, if published, the whole world
would know that the locals get no benefits… and how much mining tax the government
should get. They don’t want the world to see.”
Jade businessman9
Jade businesses are required to pay a range of fees, royalties and taxes to the Myanmar government.
These include licence and administrative fees, a 20% value-based tax on jade at the mine site, a 10% tax
on emporium sales, and standard business taxes including a commercial tax.10 In addition, Myanmar’s
state-owned enterprises the Myanmar Gems Enterprise (MGE) and army companies like Myanma
Economic Holdings Limited have stakes in the majority of large jade mines and receive 40% of post-tax
sales revenues from each of them.11 Theoretically, therefore, the lion’s share of jade revenues should
end up in state coffers.
Based on the limited government data available, however, Global Witness estimates that the state may
have received less than US$374 million in official jade revenues in 2014; under 2% of our production
estimate of US$31 billion.12 Without detailed data on Myanmar’s budget and expenditure, it is impossible
to track exactly what the government does with the jade money it receives – and how much is spent on
much-needed development of Kachin State and the country more broadly. What is clear, however, is that
Myanmar’s military is a significant beneficiary of the revenues from jade.
The Ministry of Defence receives a direct cut of state revenues through its 12% share of the national
budget, and army companies such as Myanma Economic Holdings Limited hold stakes in various jade
mining operations.13 More significantly, as Chapter 2 shows, the families of retired army generals stand
behind some of the jade industry’s biggest players, giving them access to a major revenue stream which
has, until now, been kept in the dark.
“Taxes and revenues on the use of natural resources must be collected by a democratically
elected Kachin State government and the process clearly and transparently explained to the
residents of the state.”
KDNG / Kachin State Natural Resources Development Policy Discussion Paper
So far internationally-supported reform efforts Real reform could see the benefits of jade
have focused on Myanmar’s petroleum industry. re-directed towards much-needed development.
Natural gas, which generated export revenues of Myanmar has one of the lowest life expectancies
US$4.2 billion in 2014, is seen as the key driver of in the region, and the people of Kachin State suffer
the country’s economy.14 Jade dwarfs gas, however. acutely from the impacts of a decades-long conflict.15
It should be the focus of efforts to combat A single kilogram of the highest priced jade sold
corruption and channel extractive industry at the 2014 emporium would have generated
benefits to those in most need, rather than an enough revenue to fund 147 health clinics in
afterthought. Kachin State for one year.16

28 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
EITI: Window-dressing or game-changer?
“Jade companies won’t publish any clear information on the business and they
certainly won’t announce it internationally. That’s why the government won’t invite
representatives of the jade business to join this discussion [about EITI] because they are
afraid that all the corruption and misery will come out and the world will see.”
Jade businessman17
Under President Thein Sein, Myanmar has committed to tackling the secrecy and opacity which has
dogged its natural resource industries for so many years. In July 2014, the country became a candidate
member of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), a global standard for governance of
the oil, gas and mining sectors.18
The EITI sets out requirements and recommendations for the publication of extractive industry data.
These include: production volumes; information on licence allocation processes; concession licence and
contract terms; the identities of individuals behind companies which bid for, operate or invest in oil, gas
and mining projects; payments to the government from extractive companies (including state-owned
enterprises); and government receipts from such companies.19 EITI also requires that civil society has
the freedom to express views on issues relating to natural resource governance.20
“For limited protection mechanisms such as EITI to work properly, there must be freedom of
movement and information. These freedoms are currently not guaranteed as there is
continued harassment and intimidation of media, CSOs and local people by central authority
structures such as the military, police and government officers.”
KDNG/Kachin State Natural Resources Development Policy Discussion Paper
The impact EITI has varies tremendously from country to country depending on the level of commitment of the
government concerned. The Liberian government, for example, has incorporated not only the EITI provisions
into national law but also additional anti-corruption measures.21 By contrast, in Azerbaijan the implementation
of the EITI has failed to tackle corruption in the country’s oil industry and the government has imposed
restrictions on civil society organisations’ ability to hold public officials and extractive companies to account.22
Some Myanmar government officials are demonstrating real commitment to greater transparency.
During the course of the research for this report, both the Ministry of Mines and its state-owned enterprise,
Myanmar Gems Enterprise (MGE), have provided assistance and information on the jade industry to
Global Witness. There is also growing awareness of EITI amongst companies. Two of the prominent jade
businesses profiled in Chapter 2, Htoo Group and Ruby Dragon, have already started disclosing data on
their operations to Global Witness.23
This is a promising start, but the real test will be Myanmar’s first EITI report which is due to be published
in the next few months. The extent to which this makes data on jade available to local people will be a
critical marker of whether Myanmar’s EITI is a credible reform process or an empty promise.24

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 29
Slicing up the jade pie publish invitations to tender in the newspapers
and interested companies will register at the
Myanmar Investment Commission.29 They then
In Myanmar the established narrative holds that have a month during which they can study maps
jade is produced in a remote, conflict-riven corner at MGE and make site visits before submitting a
of the country which it is not possible for the bid.30 Where a mine has been newly discovered,
government to administer or regulate. The conflict the site will be inspected and if MGE then decides
element of this is true (see Chapter 4) – the rest to award it to the applicant, a signature bonus will
is not. In reality, the Nay Pyi Taw authorities have be payable.31 Licences are awarded for three or
full control of the major jade mines in the Hpakant five year periods but can be extended by up to ten
area. They decide who has access to valuable years.32
concessions and on what basis.
Companies can hold jade concessions in three forms:
Evidence collected by Global Witness strongly
suggests that the licensing process is weighted • Under the ‘a kyo thu’ system, whereby they
heavily in favour of a powerful elite connected have a profit-sharing arrangement with the
or allied to the ruling Union Solidarity and Ministry of Mines’ state-owned enterprise
Development Party (USDP) and the military, MGE. Private companies take 60% of post-tax
who use networks of anonymous companies and revenues and the government takes 40%.33
proxies to disguise their identities. The notion of There are various advantages to an a kyo thu
Kachin State being ungovernable allows this elite licence, including bigger block sizes (up to
to perpetuate the idea that applying transparency 50 acres), longer licence periods and easier
reforms such as EITI to the jade business is not extension processes than are allowed for
possible. This sustains the secretive, abusive and ‘private’ licences. According to an industry
highly lucrative status quo. representative, companies which enter into a
kyo thu arrangement are not required to pay
a licence fee.34 However, it remains the sole
Awarding jade licences: the official
responsibility of the private partner to
account
undertake the mining operations and cover
costs.35
According to the Ministry of Mines’ gemstone
division, MGE, the jade mining area in Hpakant • As entirely private concessions under which the
amounts to nearly 35,000 acres, although it companies take all post-tax sales revenues.
appears that not all of this is actually mined.25 ‘Private’ permits are awarded for one-acre
The value of deposits varies considerably depending blocks, and these can be ‘designated’ or
on the grade and type of stone they hold, and ‘discovered’ licences. Companies can apply
changes in fashion and consumer demand for for multiple licences up to a limit of 50 acres
different colours and varieties of jade.26 Certain per company.36 There does not, however,
mining sites such as Maw Sizar, Kawng San, Kayin appear to be any obstacle to an individual
Chaung, Nam Maw and Gwi Hka are widely setting up several companies to avoid this limit.
reputed to hold the most valuable deposits, and
are therefore particularly sought after.27 • In partnership with an army company such as
Myanma Economic Holdings Limited (MEHL).
Concession areas are either known mines which These are classified as ‘private’ licences, but
the Ministry of Mines has demarcated or mines revenues are shared between the private
which have been discovered by a party who has partner and the army company. The share
then sought permission to explore from the Ministry split is kept secret, but industry figures say
of Mines.28 For known mines, the government will that the army company commonly takes a

30 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
40% post-tax share.37 Both MGE and Minister and the Managing Directors of the Ministry
MEHL deny that the army company and its of Mines, following a review of sealed bids and a
partnerships have a distinct or special
consideration of the background of each bidder.43
status.38 However, numerous accounts from
This decision is then approved by a “leading”
industry sources indicate that military
cross-ministry committee comprising the Minister
company joint ventures are effectively a
of Mines, the Deputy Minister of Mines, the Deputy
parallel system.39
Minister of Home Affairs, the Deputy Minister of
According to MGE, the minimum bid for a Finance, the Deputy Minister of National Planning
‘discovered’ block is 500,000 kyat (roughly and Economic Development, the Deputy Attorney
US$500), and at least one million kyat (US$1,000) General, the Director General of the Directorate
for a ‘designated’ block.40 Bids can, however, go of Water Resources and Improvement of River
up to 50 million kyat (US$50,000).41 The transfer
Systems, the Director General of the Department
of licences is strictly prohibited, so if a company
of Forestry and the Director General of the
wishes to relinquish a jade mine it is supposed to
Department of Mines.44 Maps – never previously
hand it back to the Ministry of Mines, rather than
published – showing which companies hold official
selling it or passing it on to any other party.42
licences to major jade concession areas across
Decisions on jade licence awards are made by Hpakant are shown below and on the following
a committee composed of the Minister, the Deputy pages.
Jade mining concessions in
Gwi Hka (Whay Khar) area HHmmaaww JJaa d G d G ee aa RR LLoo aayy nn ss ee ((1144))
KK HH SS LL aa aa oo mm uu yy nn nn aa aa ee gg rr ww (( SS TT 11 GG aa aa 55 nn ww aa )) GG HH LLoo ee mm mm nn aa ee ss ww (( CC 11 GG ii 00 tt aa yy )) HHmm AAmm aaww ee M G M Gaa yy aa LL KK nn oo HH HH BB mm nn mm Z mm Z ee aa aa S S aa (( rr ww h 2 h 2 ww JJaa )) ww GG dd GG ee aa ee aa TT LL RR LL aa oo oo aa uu nn yy nn nn e s e s ee gg (( (( GG 11 11 22 yy 44 )) aa )) HHmmaaww LL GG uu aa NN LL gg oo ee nnee ((1111)) HH PP mm aa aa nn ww HH GG uukk aa ee LL DD oonn uu ee ww HH (( aa 33 mm )) a S a S ww eeaa GG SS aa uu nn LLoo SS nn tt e a e arr ((1111))
GGwwii HHkkaa ((3300)) SShhwwee JJ aa GG nn aa uu KK nn aarr gg (( 22 GG )) aauunngg HHmm NN aa aa ww yy LL GG iinn aa LL && oo SS nn oo ee nn (( ss 1133))
MMyyiinnttzzuu TThhaarr MMyy JJaa aa MM nn nn mm aa KK uu aa aa nn rr rr gg (( MM 44)) eeee JJ JJ aa aa nn dd ee KK LL aa aa rr nn ((33 dd )) HHmm HH aaww ttoo oo GG aa GG LL rroo oo uu nn pp ee ((88))
JJaann KKaarr ((88)) GGwwii HHkkaa ((55)) MMooee MMiinn HHtteett JJaann KKaarr ((11)) HHmmaaww LL GG uu aa NN LL gg oo ee nnee ((1111)) HHmm TThh aaww iirrii GG BBaa aa tt LL SS oo oo nn nn ee ee ((55))MM HH y m y m aa aa nn ww mm GG aarr aa WW LLoo iinn nn GG ee aa ((44 ttee ))
PPww GGww iinn ii tt HH HH kk tt aa oo oo ((11 SS 66 aa )) nn JJ GG aann oo ll KK dd aa ee rr nn (( 11 SStt 22 aa )) rr JJaaddee LLaanndd SS HH hh mm wwee aa ww GG aa GG uu aa nn LL gg oo GG nn aa ee uu ((11 nn )) gg HH SS mm ww aa ee ww TT hh GG ii aa hh aa LL oo AA nn uu ee nn (( gg 99))
AA GG JJ uu aa nn oo nn gg lldd KK SS ee aa aa nn rr ww (( SS 11 tt MM 11 aa )) rr iinn AArrnn JJaa ee nn MM KK yy aa aa rr JJ nn (( HH aa 55 mm nn uu )) aa uu KK rr aa PP rr oo (( oo 66)) GGww YY DD aa ii aa dd HH gg aa kk oo nn aa nn aa (( rr 77 GG SS )) ww aaii ii && HH WW kkaa ii nn ((44 ee )) GG LL ww oo ii nn HH gg kk BB aa yy (( ii 11 tt )) YYaa JJ dd aa AA aa nn nn nn KK aa aa aa rr GG rr MM e e (( t 7 t 7 yy )) aaee SS HH hh mm wwee aa ww GG aa GG uu aa nn LL gg oo GG nn aa ee uu ((66 nn )) gg TToo HHoo PPiinn
GGwwii HHkkaa ((33))
HHoollee iinn OOnnee GGwwii HHkkaa ((99))
GGwwii HHkkaa ((88)) NNeeww JJaaddee
GG MM SS ww aa yy ii nn aa HH tt EE kk NN aa aa oo ii nn (( ee 66)) GG TThh ww YY uu ii ii YY HH AA aa kk uu SS aa nn h h (( gg 33 ww 44 ee )) JJ MM oo yy iinn aa GG tt nn VV ww mm ee ii aa nn HH rr tt uu kk SS aa rr ii ee TT hh ((22 uu ))
JJaa
((KK
dd
PP yy
ee
aa aa d d
PP
uu aa
aa
kk tt
dd
hh SS
aa
aa ee
tt
rr
hh
ii )) nn
aarr
SS GG eeii ww nnnn ii HH LL kk ee aa ii AA ((11 uu 00 nn )) gg
GG NN ww ee ii ww HH JJ kk aa aa dd (( ee 88)) ((2277 GG )) ww GG ii oo HH lldd kk aa UUnnii BBaa GG ww ww gg ii aa HH GG kk oo aa nnee MM NNaa aa tt KK uu aa rraa rr ll PP MM iinn yy (( aa 11 ee ))
GGwwii HHkkaa ((2233))
NN GG aa MM ww iinn yy ii gg aa HH nn GG kk mm aa rroo aa (( uu 11 rr ) p ) p GG JJ ww aa ii dd HH ee kk RR aa aa (( yy 33 ss 88)) GG NN ww iillaa ii rr HH LL kk ii aa nn (( LL 33 aa 66 tt )) ((2244 GG )) ww SSee ii ii HH nn kk MM aa iinn GG RR (( ww uu 22 55 ii SS )) T HH T ee UU hh ii kk nn ee aa tt HHee HH GG iinn kk ww aa ii --
GG RR ww aayy ii ss HH FF kk aa aa mm ((33 iill 77 yy )) SS WW HH hh tt ii ww nn eel e l e tt
GGwwii HHkkaa ((3355))
KKyyaauukk SSeeiinnnn WWiinn
GGwwii HHkkaa ((2222))
KKyyaauukk AAuunngg SSaayyaarr
GGwwii HHkkaa ((1144))
KKyyaauukk SSeeiinn SShhaaee SSaauunngg GGwwii HHkkaa ((1122))
KKyyaauukk SSeeiinnnn YYaaddaannaarr GGwwii HHkkaa ((1188))
HHttaayy PPaaiinngg
KKyy GG aa ww uukk ii HH SSee kk ii aa nn (( nn 11 M 5 M 5)) iinn WWhh WW aa ii yy nn nn KK hh PP aa hh rr oo (( ee 1133))
YYaa GG dd ww aann ii aa HH rr kk SS aa ii nn ((11 TT 77 hh )) iirrii SS GG eeii ww nn ii MM HH yy kk aa aa AA ((11 uu 99 nn )) gg
Key
GGwwii HHkkaa ((3300))
SSeeiinn PPhhyyoo GGwwii HHkkaa ((2288))
PPaann MMyyaatt NNoo YYoonn - Added Private blocks (1 acre each)
GGwwii HHkkaa ((2266)) LLiinn MMooee
- Added A kyo thu blocks (joint venture with MGE)
GG BBaa ww ww ii gg HH aa kk aa GG oo ((22 nn 99 ee )) GG MM ww aa ii hh HH aa kk KK aa yy (( aa 22 ee 33)) - A kyo thu blocks (joint venture with MGE)
Note: In this and the following two maps we have, wherever possible, written the names of the companies in the same way that they are registered in DICA English
language / Roman script records to make it easier to look up who these firms are. This introduces some inconsistencies in the way particular words and names are written.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 31
Yadanar Si
Kya J w o S i N n an t a V i n H e g k n a & t r u T B re a ro n (1 th ) ers Jo S Y in a e n t M V H e a k n n a t H r u T r e e a in n (3) Jo M i S n y a t a n Y n V a H e m d n k a a t a n r u r a S r T e r h a w ( n 1 e 4)
San
Hkar
M
M
a
E
w
H L
1 2
S
5
a n
b
H
lo
k
c
a
k
r
s Shw S e a n E a H in k a S r i T C a o n m (7 p ) any Sa S n h H w Th k e a i t N r s T a a a r g n a r (8)
S A a
A
u n
h
n
t
H g
w
k M
i
a
n
r y
A
T in a
h
n
t
M
e
(
t
u 9) Tan (10)
San H A k u a n r g T a N n g J w o e in M t V o e e nture To
Ginsi
Htay Aung Kyaw
San Hkar Tan (3)
Ye Man Hein
San Hkar Tan (4)
Super Seinn
San Hkar Tan (2) Lau Lu
Hpa Wa (3)
Shwe Pyi Lyan
Key
San
- Private blocks (1 acre each) Ye S L a w n in H O ka o r C T o an m ( p 6 a ) ny San Hkar River D H u k m ar p N K a y m ei T Ja a n G g u ( n 6 ) Nam Jang (6)
Kyauk Seinn
- A kyo thu blocks (joint venture with MGE) San Hkar Tan Joint Venture (1) Oo Ya Yadanar
Hpa Wa (2)
Shwe Byaine Phyu
Kyaw S N a a n in H g p & e B (1 ro ) thers Taw Maw Mya W n a m h a K r y P e a h (1 ta ) ma Nam Jang
Hte Lone Seinn Ph H o p T a h W ar a H (1 to ) o Yada P n y a a r e mon Nam Jang
San Hpe
River Reserve Tracts
Taw Maw (2)
Jade Land
K S & y a a n B S w r H a o W n N p th e a i H n e i ( p n n r 1 s g e e ) r (2)Ta V w ill a M g a e w MEHL Ba M m a w Ga A M h a B w a W M M ar a a r B M w a o n a e w Gam Aung S S e e in in n n M Jo ei i t n S t w Ve e nture Moe W Pi a n i A Jo u i n n g t V G e a n b tu ar re (5) J S o i i l ( n v N W t e g V r a w e E h n l e e K t p S u y h i e r n e a ) n (2 t ) Wah Kye G W r ( P e M a a a h a h t h t K G a a y e m e A n a s ( e 4 a ) s ) is J ( o K R y i i n c w W t h e V e a e W s h n t a K t G u y S e e r o m e n ( s e 6 ) )
C M S h (3 a e y H n ) i i n k S k H e S a M p w i i n i e n e e S T a ra m c a t Jin L g a L T m o H a n w p a e u a M w n Se g a A i w n ( c 2 a ( ) 1 d ) emy Ka P K u w h n K i u n g h t t t M u e P t r h o t ( e o n 2 r o ) Y ( a 1 N d ) M a a d E n i H a L r J Y o u i a n L n t a V m G e e a n m u tu n s r t g e o n (4 e ) Max J M o y t in o a M t n A V m o y e a e a n r r P t J u t i a r n r a d e n e ( s 1 f ) erred Moe P S in J h o ( J i T i n o n a K i i t u n n y V t g t e e P V S A n a e t l t a n T i u n r t h r ) u L e a r i w g e (3 h ( ) 6 t ) M ( J y A o a u in n n M W t m g V o a a N e t h r e n a W K t O in u y i o n g e re ) Y G ( a 5 a y ) te T W hi V a t e h T n h K t o u y n e re e J ( o L 7 o i ) n n t e
W Ba a n n g B N ro g t u h e (1 rs ) (Ky Ja B a d a u n e k g M S e N o i g n u u n T a t ( a 2 u i ) n n g) L L a a m m a a u u A n n u g g n ( J g 5 o ) S i K n u h t M V ai e n y n a g t t u L r o e n ( e 1) Masa Khin Zaw Aung & Brothers Wah Kye (7)
Moe Pin Nam Jang (8)
Joint Venture (7) King Myanmar
Moe Pin Moe Pi K n h J u o n in P t a V - e O n h ture (3) Joint Venture (8) Unity Join M t V o e e n P tu in re (9)
Ky 6 a 1 u a k c M re y s at Sh H w l e w Y a w r et
Kaday M J y o a in t Y t a V m en o t n ure (2) Lin J n o i L n e M t t V t o W e e n i P t n u i Y n r a e d (2 a ) nar Myodaw
Myanma
Gongyi
Moe Pin Joint Venture (4)
Xie Family
Kaday
Joint K V a e d n a tu y re (1) Mya Jo n i m nt a V r e N n a t i u n r g e G (5 ro ) up K J a o d in a t y
(Ky Ja a d u e k M Se o in u n Ta ta u i n n g) Pan K H ad uk a e y ( D 4 u ) wa Venture
Kyau I k n S M ei a n ( S 1 w 6) an Ar Joi H n t t o K V o a e d G n a t r u y o r u e p (3) Common dump Jo G in o t D l K V d r a e e a d n g n a t o J u y n a r d e e (6) K J a o d in a t y Lone Khin
In Ma River Y V a e d n a tu n r a e K ( y 7 a )
Phyu
Mya Seinn
Kaday Joint Venture (1) Golf Course
Jade Mountain (Kyauk Sein Taung)
Kaday Joint Venture (2)
Myat Yamon
In Ma Joint Venture (4)
In
Ma
River
ARS Company
Ma
M
L
y
a
a
w
n
n
m
g
a
J
r
o
T
i
h
n
i
t
r i
V
Y
e
a
n
d
t
a
u
n
re
a r
(1)
In Ma Joint Venture (15) Jo Th in e t i n V I t e n n W M t i u n a r e H ( t 1 e 0 t ) J S o e in in t V S I e n h n w M t e u a r K e y ( a 1 w 1) Ma Lawng Myanm M a a r L S a e w in n n g L ( e 3 i ) Aung
Lonn Khinn Aung Myay Joint Venture (2)
Thi Raw Mani
In Ma
Pr H a i y ll er Sa I n n M M i a h ( t 3 a ) su In Ma (12) T I h n A a y M n e a L Y w a (2 r i ) n P Jo h i y n o t T V h e i n h t a u K re y a (1 w ) Maw ( s 9 i ) z J a a r d Jo e i P n o t w Ve e n r ture C N T r h y y e a s r i t n a Y l a C J r h a ( a d 1 n e ) In Ma Win Paing Kyaw
Jo N (D in o u t r t V W h e e u n r n t n u K S r y e t e a V ( M r ) 4 e ) n K I y J n y t a o u a t M i n r u M e t a k i ( n 5) Joi M nt y V a I e n n n m M tu a a r N e e (13) Jo A in y M a t r V a P w e y n s i t i z P u a h re r y o (4) Mya M nm aw a s r i R za ic r h (3 L ) and Ma K w y s a iz in a g r J I o n i t n e t r n V a e t n io tu n r a e l (2)
Maw Wan Gyi (15) Join K t Y a a V I u n d e n a n M g n t a u a S r r u e (8) V A e u n I n J n M t o g u M i i n r n H e t a e ( i 6 n ) N V e e w n I J n t o G u M in r o e t a ld (7 e ) n Jo Y M o in n a G t w g V w e e W h i n H e a t n u k a r G e T y ( h i 4 a ) M uk o e Kye ( J 1 l o 3 M in ) a H t w V a e s w i n z q t a u K r r M y e i a S w i H siz tu a n r (1) Py M i T a a w n s i Y z a a d r a (6 n ) ar Au M n a g L M an yi n Jo D in i t Y V a e d n a t n u a r r e M (2 y ) ay
Ne I w n M tra a cts Com M m aw on si z d a u r mp Green Light Company Join K M t a Y V u a a e n d w n g a s t n u i M z a r a o e r r n (17) M V a e J w o n i t s n u i t z r a e r T J h o e in in t M V K a e a n b L t a a u r n r A e u (1 n ) g
M Jo B a i a n w t W W V a e a T n n e t u t K r L a e a L n ( a 1 y ) N V M G e g n a y w H w t i u e t J e o W r H e t in a e ( n t 1 in ) A V M G u en n a y N w t i g u J a S o W r n e h in a w ( t n 2 e ) Maws M iza a r w P s r i o za fi r t s T h ra a c ri t n s g (21) Maws K iz y a a r u J k o i M nt y V a e t n M t i u n re (17) M V a e J w o n i t s n u i t z r a e r Ma S L a a n n M Jo y i a n t t Y V a e d n a t n u a re r (3)
Zaw Kyaut Myet Co/op Mawsizar Joint Venture
Mawsizar Joint Venture (24) (16) Suu Htoo Pan
Aye Aye Khaing Nam Mahpit
Mawsizar Joint Venture (9) Mawsizar (2) Mahar Kyaut Seinn
Yadana Inwa
MEHL Jo J M a in d a t w e V E e W m n a t p n u e r G e ro y ( r i 3) Nam Mahpit M N a a n m S h M w a e h p Th it i t (3 sa ) r 1 M N y a a m nm M a a I h n p A it r r J K o y in e t e V M en a t r u K r y e el
Maw H t W un an T a K u a k L S a a y ( A 2) ye M K A a a y w L e a W y K h ( a 3 a n ) ing Jade Emperor M M A a a y w w e W W Ay a a e n n K G h y a i i ( n 1 g 7) Bu L m oi T N r g a u cts 3 2 4 4 6 J P a y n i T K a h w a t W (7 ai ) Sar Phyo J N oi a n m t V M en ah tu p r i e t
Maw Wan K P a h L y a o y S J i o T i h n u t Venture (4) Bu L m oi T N r g a u cts Quarter ( 1 ) S Ja h n w K e h W at a h (4 M ) yay (Mandalay) 5 (4) Jan Khat (3)
(2) Jan Khat (2) Taung Ni Taung
Maw Wan Gyi Joint Venture Unity (5) Jan Khat (5)
Seinn Mya Aung (3) Jan Khat (1) Nan Oo Yadanar
Bayani (6) Jan Khat (6) Maha Jade
aerA
441
elcitrA
Yadanar Si
San Hkar River
Kya J w o S i N n an t a V i n H e g k n a & t r u T B re a ro n (1 th ) ers Jo S Y in a e n t M V H e a k n n a t H r u T r e e a in n (3) Jo M i S n y a t a n Y n V a H e m d n k a a t a n r u r a S r T e r h a w ( n 1 e 4)
San
Hkar
Article 144 Area
M
M
a
E
w
H L
1 2
S
5
a n
b
H
lo
k
c
a
k
r
s Shw S e a n E a H in k a S r i T C a o n m (7 p ) any Sa S n h H w Th k e a i t N r s T a a a r g n a r (8)
S A a
A
u n
h
n
t
H g
w
k M
i
a
n
r y
A
T in a
h
n
t
M
e
(
t
u 9) Tan (10)
Sa
Y
n
e M
Hk
a
a
n
r
H
Ta
e
n
in
( 3 )
San H A k u a n r g T a N n g J w o e in M t V o e e nture To
Ginsi
Uru
River Htay Aung Kyaw
San Hkar Tan (4)
Super Seinn
San Hkar Tan (2) Lau Lu
Hpa Wa (3)
Shwe Pyi Lyan
Key
San
- Private blocks (1 acre each) Ye S L a w n in H O ka o r C T o an m ( p 6 a ) ny San Hkar River D H u k m ar p N K a y m ei T Ja a n G g u ( n 6 ) Nam Jang (6)
Kyauk Seinn
- A kyo thu blocks (joint venture with MGE) San Hkar Tan Joint Venture (1) Oo Ya Yadanar
Hpa Wa (2)
Shwe Byaine Phyu
Kyaw S N a a n in H g p & e B (1 ro ) thers Taw Maw Mya W n a m h a K r y P e a h (1 ta ) ma Nam Jang
Hte Lone Seinn Ph H o p T a h W ar a H (1 to ) o Yada P n y a a r e mon Nam Jang
San Hpe
River Reserve Tracts
Taw Maw (2)
Jade Land
K S & y a a n B S w r H a o W n N p th e a i H n e i ( p n n r 1 s g e e ) r (2)Ta V w ill a M g a e w MEHL Ba M m a w Ga A M h a B w a W M M ar a a r B M w a o n a e w Gam Aung S S e e in in n n M Jo ei i t n S t w Ve e nture Moe W Pi a n i A Jo u i n n g t V G e a n b tu ar re (5) J S o i i l ( n v N W t e g V r a w e E h n l e e K t p S u y h i e r n e a ) n (2 t ) Wah Kye G W r ( P e M a a a h a h t h t K G a a y e m e A n a s ( e 4 a ) s ) is J ( o K R y i i n c w W t h e V e a e W s h n t a K t G u y S e e r o m e n ( s e 6 ) )
C M S h (3 a e y H n ) i i n k S k H e S a M p w i i n i e n e e S T a ra m c a t Jin L g a L T m o H a n w p a e u a M w n Se g a A i w n ( c 2 a ( ) 1 d ) emy Ka P K u w h n K i u n g h t t t M u e P t r h o t ( e o n 2 r o ) Y ( a 1 N d ) M a a d E n i H a L r J Y o u i a n L n t a V m G e e a n m u tu n s r t g e o n (4 e ) Max J M o y t in o a M t n A V m o y e a e a n r r P t J u t i a r n r a d e n e ( s 1 f ) erred Moe P S in J h o ( J i T i n o n a K i i t u n n y V t g t e e P V S A n a e t l t a n T i u n r t h r ) u L e a r i w g e (3 h ( ) 6 t ) M ( J y A o a u in n n M W t m g V o a a N e t h r e n a W K t O in u y i o n g e re ) Y G ( a 5 a y ) te T W hi V a t e h T n h K t o u y n e re e J ( o L 7 o i ) n n t e
W Ba a n n g B N ro g t u h e (1 rs ) (Ky Ja B a d a u n e k g M S e N o i g n u u n T a t ( a 2 u i ) n n g) L L a a m m a a u u A n n u g g n ( J g 5 o ) S i K n u h t M V ai e n y n a g t t u L r o e n ( e 1) Masa Khin Zaw Aung & Brothers Wah Kye (7)
Moe Pin Nam Jang (8)
Joint Venture (7) King Myanmar
Moe Pin Moe Pi K n h J u o n in P t a V - e O n h ture (3) Joint Venture (8) Unity Join M t V o e e n P tu in re (9)
Ky 6 a 1 u a k c M re y s at Sh H w l e w Y a w r et
Kaday M J y o a in t Y t a V m en o t n ure (2) Lin J n o i L n e M t t V t o W e e n i P t n u i Y n r a e d (2 a ) nar Myodaw
Myanma
Gongyi
Moe Pin Joint Venture (4)
Xie Family
Kaday
Joint K V a e d n a tu y re (1) Mya Jo n i m nt a V r e N n a t i u n r g e G (5 ro ) up K J a o d in a t y
(Ky Ja a d u e k M Se o in u n Ta ta u i n n g) Pan K H ad uk a e y ( D 4 u ) wa Venture
Kyau I k n S M ei a n ( S 1 w 6) an Ar Joi H n t t o K V o a e d G n a t r u y o r u e p (3) Common dump Jo G in o t D l K V d r a e e a d n n g a t o J u y n a r d e e (6) K J a o d in a t y Lone Khin
In Ma River Y V a e d n a tu n r a e K ( y 7 a )
Phyu
Mya Seinn
Kaday Joint Venture (1) Golf Course
Jade Mountain (Kyauk Sein Taung)
Kaday Joint Venture (2)
Myat Yamon
In Ma Joint Venture (4)
In
Ma
River
ARS Company
Ma
M
L
y
a
a
w
n
n
m
g
a
J
r
o
T
i
h
n
i
t
r i
V
Y
e
a
n
d
t
a
u
n
re
a r
(1)
In Ma Joint Venture (15) Jo Th in e t i n V I t e n n W M t i u n a r e H ( t 1 e 0 t ) J S o e in in t V S I e n h n w M t e u a r K e y ( a 1 w 1) Ma Lawng Myanm M a a r L S a e w in n n g L ( e 3 i ) Aung
Lonn Khinn Aung Myay Joint Venture (2)
Thi Raw Mani
In Ma
Pr H a i y ll er S
J
a I
o
n n
N (D i n o
M M
u t r
i a
t V
I
W
h
h
n
e
( t
e
3
u
a
n
M
r
)
n
s
t n
u a
u K S r y e t e a V ( M r ) 4 e ) n K I y J n y t a o u a t M i n r u M e t a k i ( n 5)
Win In P M ain a g
J
(1
o
K 2
i M n
y ) a
t y
w
V a I e n n n m M t
T
u a
I
a
h n A
r N e
a y M n
e
e
(1
a L Y
3
w a (
)
2 r i )
J
n
o A in y M a t r V a P w e y n s i t i z P u
P
a
J
h r
o
e
h
r y
i y
o (
n
4
o t
)
T V h e i n h
M
t a u
y
K r
a
e
M
y
n
a (
m a
1 w
w
)
a s r i R za ic r h (3 L ) and
Maw ( s 9 i ) z J a a r d Jo e i P n o t w Ve e n r ture
Ma K w y s a iz in a g r J I o n i t n e t r n V a e t n io tu n r a e l (2) Uru
River C N T r h y y e a s r i t n a Y l a C J r h a ( a d 1 n e )
Maw Wan Gyi (15) Join K t Y a a V I u n d e n a n M g n t a u a S r r u e (8) V A e u n I n J n M t o g u M i i n r n H e t a e ( i 6 n ) N V e e w n I J n t o G u M in r o e t a ld (7 e ) n Jo Y M o in n a G t w g V w e e W h i n H e a t n u k a r G e T y ( h i 4 a ) M uk o e Kye ( J 1 l o 3 M in ) a H t w V a e s w i n z q t a u K r r M y e i a S w i H siz tu a n r (1) Py M i T a a w n s i Y z a a d r a (6 n ) ar Au M n a g L M an yi n Jo D in i t Y V a e d n a t n u a r r e M (2 y ) ay
Ne I w n M tra a cts Com M m aw on si z d a u r mp Green Light Company Join K M t a Y V u a a e n d w n g a s t n u i M z a r a o e r r n (17) M V a e J w o n i t s n u i t z r a e r T J h o e in in t M V K a e a n b L t a a u r n r A e u (1 n ) g
M Jo B a i a n w t W W V a e a T n n e t u t K r L a e a L n ( a 1 y ) N V M G e g n a y w H w t i u e t J e o W r H e t in a e ( n t 1 in ) A V M G u en n a y N w t i g u J a S o W r n e h in a w ( t n 2 e ) Maws M iza a r w P s r i o za fi r t s T h ra a c ri t n s g (21) Maws K iz y a a r u J k o i M nt y V a e t n M t i u n re (17) M V a e J w o n i t s n u i t z r a e r Ma S L a a n n M Jo y i a n t t Y V a e d n a t n u a re r (3)
Zaw Kyaut Myet Co/op Mawsizar Joint Venture
Mawsizar Joint Venture (24) (16) Suu Htoo Pan
Aye Aye Khaing Nam Mahpit
Mawsizar Joint Venture (9) Mawsizar (2) Mahar Kyaut Seinn
Yadana Inwa
MEHL Jo J M a in d a t w e V E e W m n a t p n u e r G e ro y ( r i 3) Nam Mahpit M N a a n m S h M w a e h p Th it i t (3 sa ) r 1 M N y a a m nm M a a I h n p A it r r J K o y in e t e V M en a t r u K r y e el
Maw H t W un an T a K u a k L S a a y ( A 2) ye M K A a a y w L e a W y K h ( a 3 a n ) ing Jade Emperor M M A a a y w w e W W Ay a a e n n K G h y a i i ( n 1 g 7) Bu L m oi T N r g a u cts 3 2 4 4 6 J P a y n i T K a h w a t W (7 ai ) Sar Phyo J N oi a n m t V M en ah tu p r i e t
Maw Wan K P a h L y a o y S J i o T i h n u t Venture (4) Bu L m oi T N r g a u cts Quarter ( 1 ) S Ja h n w K e h W at a h (4 M ) yay (Mandalay) 5 (4) Jan Khat (3)
(2) Jan Khat (2) Taung Ni Taung
Maw Wan Gyi Joint Venture Unity (5) Jan Khat (5)
Seinn Mya Aung (3) Jan Khat (1) Nan Oo Yadanar
Bayani (6) Jan Khat (6) Maha Jade
aerA
441
elcitrA
Jade mining concessions
in the Lone Khin area of
Hpakant San Hkar River
AREA 1
Article 144 Area
Uru
River
AREA 2
AREA 3
AREA 4
Uru
River
AREA 5

32 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Jade mining concessions
around Hpakant Town
NN
MMEEHHLL
BBaallaahhkkaa ((22))
YYaaddaannaarr SSiinn TThhiirrii
MMaa SS ww uutt MM KKaa aa bb uu aa ((22)) NN MM gg aa ww ww ee MM SS aa ii HH uu ee ((11 iinn 11 )) //
BBaallaahhkkaa ((22)) AAuunngg SSaaww MMiinn
KKeeyy WWeett TThhiitt CChhaa MMaaww WWaann KKaallaayy ((55))
PPaann MMyyaatt NNoo YYoonn
-- AA kkyyoo tthhuu bblloocckkss ((jjooiinntt vveennttuurree wwiitthh MMGGEE)) TTuunn BB aa NN llaa aa hh iinn kk gg aa AA ((11 uu )) nngg MM ((88 aa )) ww UU nn MM iitt aa yy uu TThhiihh MM aa aa && ww BB MM rroo aa tt uu hheerrss
-- PPrriivvaattee bblloocckkss ((11 aaccrree eeaacchh)) MMaaww MMaauu
SShhwwee WWaahh MMyyaayy
((MMaannddaallaayy)) MMaaww MMaauu ((88))
BBaallaahhkkaa ((11)) KKaacchhiinn TTaaiinngg YYiinn TThhaarr
TTuunn NNaaiinngg
AAuunngg
JJoo SS ii hh nn KK ww tt aa VV ee llaa ee PP nn MM yy tt ii uu aa TT ww rr hh ee aa (( rr 11)) KKyyaauukk SS TT ee aa ii uu nn nn BB gg aa yy CC ii hh nn oo && (( 77 BB )) aayyiinn MMaa
ccoomm KKaa mm llaa oo nn MM dd aaww uummpp NN SS aa CC hh TT yy hh hh ww PP yy aa ee oo yy uu HH ii nn (( TT 11 gg kk aa )) ii ww tt
((KK
RR
yy
iicc
ww
TT hh CC
ee
hh ee hh
WW
aa ss oo tt uu
aa
(( GG nn 22
SS
gg ee ))
oo
mm
nn
ss
ee))
TThh NN aa ee
TT M
uu
M
ww
hh
nn
yy aa
gg GG
aa uu tt
oo
nn
CC
PP
ll
gg
hh dd
hh
oo
CC
ee
oo
nn
hh
((
nn
33
oo ee
))
(( SS 55 ii )) TThh CC
HH
aa hh
tt
uu
oo
yy nn
oo
oo gg
MMaaww MMaauu SSttrreeaamm
SS KK ee aa iinn llaa TT MM hhaa aa rr ww aapp ((33 hh )) uu AA KK gg aa gg llaa aa M M YYaa aa dd ww aa nn ((22 aa )) rr MMyyaauukk PPhhyyuu ((11)) AARREEAA 66 HHppaakkaanntt TToowwnn
KKyyaaiinngg IInntteerrnnaattiioonnaall AArreeaa 66
RReesseerrvveedd nneeww ttrraaccttss
MM KK aa yy xx ee MM tt PP yy ttoo aa aa uu nn AA nn mm yy gg aa aa rr CC rr JJ hh tt aa rr aa aa dd uu nn ee nn ssff gg ee rr ((33 rree )) dd SS -- hh MM aa yy rraa aa ww nnmm HH aa kk rr aa GG rr TT oo rr nn aa gg cc yy ttss ii MMyy VV aa ii uu llll kk aa gg PP ee hhyyuu WW MM ii yy nn aa PP uu aa kk ii nn PP gg hhyy KK uu yy aa ((44 ww )) HHppaakkaanntt GGyyii MMaaww
KKy K y K ee yy tt aa ii PP nn aa gg uu I n I n nn gg tt e e CC rr hh nn aa aa uu ttii nn oo gg nn aa ((11 ll )) KK KK yy aa aa nn KK uu CC yy kk hh KK ee aa aa SS tt uu uu ee PP nn n i n inn aa gg gg uu nn (( TT nn B 2 B 2 hh gg )) aa aa yy ww iinnSShhaa -- rr KK aa aa ww nn HH LL kk iinn aa rr WW TT ii rr nn aaccttss SS YY hh aa -- aa dd KK rr SS aa MM aa aa hh nn ww ll yy ww aa aa aa rr HH ee MM tt SS kk II KK aa aa nn aa yy ww ii nn rr aa KK ww TT ww (( aa rr 44 aa aa uu )) cc nn tt gg ss MMyyaannmmaa MM rr yyaa SS uu ee kk ii nn PP hh LLii yy nn uu ((22)) MMyy KK YY aa yy aa uu aa uu kk uu nn kk PP gg hh SS CC yy ee hh uu iinn ii ((33)) HHpp KKyy aa aa kk NN uu aa aa nn kk gg tt SS aa GG ee rr ii yy nn ii nn ((11))
EEccoonnoommiicc
CCoorrppoorraattiioonn
MMaa NNaa ((66))
LL MM yyaa aa nn NN SS aa hh (( aa 33 nn )) SSaann KKyyeell PPwwiinntt YYaaddaannaarr MMooee MMyyaayy ((11))
SSaann KKyyooii
VViillllaaggee
MMaa NNaa ((11))
MMeett LLiinn CChhaauunngg ((22)) MMyyoo NNwwee
YYaaddaannaarr TTaauunngg TTaannnn
MMeett LLiinn CChhaauunngg ((11))
SShhwwee GGaauunngg GGaauunngg
MMeett LLiinn CChhaauunngg ((33))
KKyyaauukk SSeeiinnnn NNaannddaaww
SShhwwee GGaauunngg GGaauunngg YYuu MMaarr
MM MM yyaa aa nn MM mm oo aa nn rr ee SS ii (( TT 11 hh )) uu MMaa MMoonnee ((22)) RR MM iicc aa hh MM eess oo tt nn GG ee ee (( mm 33)) ss UUrruu RRiivveerr SSaa NN ii ee TT ww aauu JJ nn aa gg dd ee ((11))
TThh MM ee aa iinn MM tt WW oonn iinn ee HH ((66 tt )) eett TThh AA aa yy nn ee LL YY ww aarr iinn ((KKyywwee WWaa SSoonnee))
KKyyaa MM uukk aa SS MM ee oo iinn nn nn ee NN ((44 aa )) ggaarr SSaatt SS DD aaii aa TT tt aa KK uu ww nn ii gg nn (( AA 22)) hhaarr
MMyyaann MM mm aa aa rr MM NN oo aa nn iinn ee gg ((55 GG )) rroouupp NNaayy LLaa PPwwiinntt SS BB aa aa tt ZZ DD aa aa nn tt KK CC ww hhaa iinn uu kk AA hh ((66 aa )) rr SSiikk MMuu GGwwii HHkkaa SSttrreeaamm SSiikk MMuu oolldd vviillllaaggee
KKyyaauukk SSeeiinn JJooiinntt VVeennttuurree ((11))
KKhhiinnee MMyyaannmmaarr
SSiikk MMuu
CCoommmmoonn
DDuummpp
BBaa ZZaann CChhaauukk ((77))
SSeenngg TTaauunngg LLoonn SSeeiinnnn
KKaayyiinn CChhaauunngg ((11))
MMyyaannmmaarr TTaakkaauunngg
ttrraannssffeerrrreedd ttoo IInnggggaa CChhaauukk
YYaarr ZZaa HHttaarr NNee JJooiinntt VVeennttuurree ((33))
BBaa WWaa TTeett LLaann SSiikk MMuu
IInnggggaa CChhaauukk ((55))
CChhaaooww BBrrootthheerrss
JJoo II ii nn nn gg tt gg VV aa ee nn CC tt hh uu aa rre u e u kk ((44)) AARREEAA 1100 TTaa MMaa HHkkaann MMaaww
NNaayy LLaa PPwwiinntt
YYaaddaannaarr
SSaann SShhwwiinn KKaayyiinn CChhaauunngg --
SSeeiinn LLoomm TTaauunngg TTaann MMaaww MMoonn SSaabbaaww
MMaaww SShhaann SSaabbaaww ((11)) JJooiinntt VVeennttuurree ((66))
MMyyaann SS mm hhww aarr ee MM TThh yy ee aa ee yykkyyeeee MMyyaannmmaarr SSeeiinnnn LLeeii AAuunngg TTaa MMaa BB MM HH WW kkaann ((11))
YYaaddaannaarr
TTaawwnngg KKaaww ((11))YYaauunngg CChhii
HHttoooo GGrroouupp
KKaann TThhaarr OOoo SSeevveenn SSttaarr MMaa SS ww hhww SS ee hh aa HH nn ee // iinn SS HH ppoo ttee tt tt ((22)) MMaa MM KK ww aa aa uu SS ww hh nn aa gg SS nn hh SS aa // uu nn SS WW pp // aa oo SS ii tt pp HH (( oo 77 ll tt yy )) (( aa 44 nn )) SS MM SS ee aa aa iinn bb ww nn aa ww SS OO hh uu (( aa 55 rr nn )) uu MM JJoo aa ii ww SS nn uu tt SS VV HH hh ee aa tt nn uu nn tt uu PP SS aa rr aa ee nn bb (( aa 33 ww )) TTaa MM WW aa ii nn HH nn kk ee aa rr nn ((11)) SS KK ee oo ii nn MM LL aa iigg ((11 hh )) tt SSeeiinnnn LLiikkee PP TT yy aa ii MM TTaa aa nn HH YY kk aa aa dd nn aa nn ((33 aa TT )) rr oo SSiikk MMuu
SShhwwee WWaahh MMyyaayy ((MMaannddaallaayy)) TTaa MMaa HHkkaann ((11))
WWiinnnneerr
LLiinn SS nn aaii HH AA tt uu ee nn tt gg AA uu ((11 nn )) gg MMaa KK ww aa SS nn hh PP aa ww nn ii // nn SS tt pp OO oo oo tt ((88)) AAhhtteett SSaabbaaww ((22))
TTaabbaarr WWaa SSwwaann AArr
KKhhaauutt KKyyaaww ((11))
HHttoooo MMyyiinntt MMaaww
KKhhaauutt KKyyaaww ((11))
PPaattttaa MMyyaarr CChhiinnttaaee
HHaauunngg PPaa ((11))
NNyyuunntt NNyyuunntt AAuunngg
HHaauunngg PPaa

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 33
Big hats and bribes: how to get your One businessman described a typical scenario,
own jade mine whereby a crony tycoon will approach a minister
and say, “I really need to get this area in Hpakant
Global Witness interviews with key players in to mine jade. Whatever it costs, I will do it.” The
the business suggest that, behind the scenes, Minister will then ensure that he gets the licence,
high-level connections and bribery are needed in return for a cut of the profits.53
to secure the most sought-after concessions. A
former official explained that whilst the Minister Both the a kyo thu and the army company partnership
of Mines does sit on the allocation committee, a arrangements come in for criticism from people
more senior political figure is also involved and is, in the jade business and some of the challenges
in practice, the real decision-maker.45 facing army company partners are described in
the next chapter. Commenting on the a kyo thu
Multiple industry sources have described how system, one long-time jade businessman noted
the award system favours a powerful elite. One
that:
businessman explained that whilst there is no set
policy on how licences are awarded, if an army
“Every a kyo thu company is related to military
figure is involved in the company that is making
officers in uniform… in practice, [a kyo thu] means
the bid, there is a 90% chance that they will get
it’s open to whoever is related to the ruling families.
it.46 A second businessman detailed how high
Even if you have money you cannot get into Hpakant
quality jade deposits go to senior officials and
without connections”.54
their children and other relatives or well-connected
businessmen, whilst deposits which yield lower
Those involved do not want outside scrutiny and
quality stones go to less-connected players.47
they “fear transparency”.55 One businessman
Another industry figure confirmed this, saying
explained that if it appears that the connection of
that companies without connections can apply
a military figure to a mining company may become
for licences but are almost certain to be granted
known, the names associated with him will simply
blocks which have only low-grade jade reserves.48
be removed from company records.56 More generally,
according to another industry representative:
“If there is a big hat involved, surely “Companies are aware of the risks of becoming too
they will get [the concession]!” high profile – the government will pay more attention
to them and the KIO will target them. So the strategy
Jade businessman49
is to divide up their operations amongst small
companies to disguise [them].”57
“If no relationship with the
government, then no mining licence.”
This description was backed up by another
Jade businessman50 businessman who explained that companies often
set up “branches” in the names of their wives
“All good quality jade belongs to the
and sons so as to avoid becoming conspicuous
families of generals.” by having one person or company holding a huge
number of acres.58
Jade businessman51
Consequently, whilst there are around 100 big
“Every cabinet minister is involved in
companies actually operating (out of 937 permit
jade – it’s their best source of income,
holders), industry sources suggest that they are
even though they have never been to
controlled by only 10 or 15 owners. The mines are
Hpakant.”
under the control of a few top names.59
Jade businessman52

34 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Greasing the jade wheel: corruption in practice
“When you go to see high-ranking officials, you don’t go empty handed.”
Former jade businessman60
Industry representatives have provided details of the system of pay-offs typically needed to obtain licences,
particularly for the most valuable jade concessions.61 They described various scenarios including the following:
• If you want a licence, there are several categories of bribes you may need to pay:
– Firstly, you need to pay a bribe to get the land surveyed and measured in line with the Gemstone Law.
– Secondly, you may need to bribe township officials, including the jade department, particularly for
the more significant concessions.
– Thirdly, you may need to bribe the Tatmadaw Northern Commander (the top army general in
Kachin State), the Kachin State Chief Minister or officials in Nay Pyi Taw.62
“All companies need one or two big hats”
Jade businessman63
• If the concession is highly sought-after, you also need connections such as family ties or friendship
with powerful figures. Such connections can also reduce the amount of money you need to put down
as a deposit.64
• If you are a drug lord, for example, you can offer a payment to an army general for his assistance in
securing a particular jade concession. If the licence comes through, this general or one of his family
members will get a share in the mining company that is then set up to carry out operations.65
• If you are a company without a ‘big hat’, you can approach a company which has high-level connections
to act as a broker for you. In this case, you would offer to pay the connected company to apply for
a licence in its name, and then allow you to use that licence. Some companies that undertake this
‘brokering’ role “have never been to Hpakant; they just use their company name [to secure licences]”.66
• If you are the son of a general who wants to take control of a certain jade mine, then you can team
up with one of the big companies. They can create a new company with a new name and share
ownership with you. These big companies can then repeat this process with the sons of other generals.67
Playing the jade game: tax levied.68 If companies then want to sell their jade
legally to the Chinese buyers who constitute the
evasion, money-laundering,
major market for the stone, they transport it to
price-manipulation, underselling
Nay Pyi Taw where it can be sold at the government-
and smuggling
organised Myanmar Gems Emporium which is
currently held once a year. It is also possible
to sell very low grade jade at occasional ‘local’
On paper, there are strict rules and regulations emporiums in Nay Pyi Taw that are aimed only
that govern Myanmar’s jade trade. When stones at Myanmar merchants.69 Another option is the
are mined in Kachin State, they are required to be market in Mandalay that generally caters to lower
officially recorded and evaluated, and a 20% tax is grade stones.70

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 35
low-value for high-value stones during the
official valuations.78 Such manoeuvres are
generally a prelude to smuggling, as described
below.79 Our calculations, based on 2014 jade
production and jade grade and price distributions
at the 2014 emporium, indicate a discrepancy
of up to US$6 billion between what this tax
could have generated in 2014 and what the
government actually received. This could be
due, in part, to legitimate reasons. We do not
have data on the costs of transporting jade
from Hpakant to Nay Pyi Taw, and therefore
‘Windows’ are cut into jade sold at the emporium so that buyers
can assess the quality of the stone. Many sellers deliberately cut do not adjust the discrepancy for these costs.
into lower quality sections of jade blocks to make them appear less Similarly, we cannot estimate the degree to
valuable than they really are. They arrange for proxies to buy the
which cutting and polishing jade added to the
stones for them, at an artificially low price, so that they pay less tax
on the sale. They then export the jade to China and cut again, this value of some stones before they were sold
time to show its most valuable sections so that it can be sold at a
at the emporium, so again we cannot adjust
massive mark-up.
for this. It is also possible that companies
may have chosen to hold part of the jade they
At big Myanmar Gems Emporium events, companies mined as stock rather than selling it in Nay
typically sell rough stones that are cut to display Pyi Taw. Given the size of the discrepancy,
their quality.71 Jade is either sold through a tender however, the likelihood is that a significant
part is due to tax evasion.
process whereby interested bidders submit
sealed bids above a reserve price or, for the most
• Tax evasion – at the official sales: If a company
valuable stones, through an auction.72 Any jade
finds a valuable piece of jade, it may deliberately
sold is then subject to a 10% sales tax, after which
cut a window into a part of the stone which is
it can be exported out of the country.73
of lower quality than the rest. This allows it
to set a floor price for the jade at a fraction
In practice, however, these formal processes
of its real value. Next, the company makes
are widely circumvented. A common complaint of
sure that its own agents or proxies secure the
industry figures is that Myanmar’s tax structure
winning bid on the stone. Because the sales
means that there is no money to be made in
price is artificially deflated, the level of tax
following the law and companies have to bypass
the company then has to pay is far lower than
taxation and official sales and smuggle their
it should be. Once the (reduced) tax has been
jade.74 Moreover, there are no standard market
paid, the company can legally transport the
rates for jade, and prices are extremely subjective,
stone to China. Here it cuts the stone again,
with demand for different colours and types
this time in a way which displays the valuable
fluctuating over time.75 This makes it easier for
part of the jade, and sells it at a much higher
companies to manipulate jade prices and escape
price. According to a prominent industry
paying duties on their jade sales.
figure, approximately 60% of 2014 emporium
sales involved vendors buying their own jade
People in the business describe a variety of
back and the top companies use this method
tactics in use to cheat the system, including: for around 80% of the jade they sell.80
• Tax evasion – at the mine site: Jade is liable • Market manipulation: At the emporiums,
to a 20% of value tax when it is first mined, buyers who have already stockpiled a certain
but Global Witness has received numerous kind of jade sometimes win bids on stones
accounts of companies paying off officials to of the same type but then fail to pay for and
reduce or avoid this tariff.76 In the words of collect them. This enables them to restrict
one jade company manager, “All of us, all the supply and to command high prices for the
companies do this”.77 Others talk of substituting jade they already have.81

36 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
• Money laundering: In some cases, vendors Chinese border is shown on page 25 above.84)
will buy back their own stones for inexplicably Some describe how licensed companies typically
high prices. One former official told Global
sell high volume, low value jade through
Witness he “[had] no doubt that this is money
government-sanctioned channels, along with
laundering”.82
a token amount of “good jade … for show”
but other jade including top grade stones are
• Smuggling: Jade businessmen estimate that
smuggled.85 This is in line with data from the
companies smuggle between 50% and 80%
2015 emporium which shows that, out of over
of jade directly to China, bypassing official
controls on both sides of the border.83 (A map 8,000 sales lots, a mere two comprised imperial
showing the routes used to carry jade to the jade, the most valuable grade.86
The main official route for selling jade mined in Hpakant
A government official inspects jade in Hpakant, assessing its value and the is through the Myanmar Gems Emporium in Myanmar’s
amount of mine site tax to be charged before the stones are transported capital, Nay Pyi Taw. High, medium and low grade jade is
to market. This process is prone to corruption and smuggling, particularly sold to international buyers, particularly from China, the
of the most valuable stones, is endemic. CREDIT: Minzayar major consumer market for jade.
This half tonne block of commercial
(medium-grade) jade was offered for sale
at 12 million euros at the 2015 Myanmar
Gems Emporium. According to those in the
business, however, licensed companies
typically offer only token amounts of their
most valuable jade at the government
sales in Nay Pyi Taw. The rest is smuggled
directly to China, bypassing the emporium
altogether.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 37
China’s appetite for the stone of As well as buying the stone, many Chinese
investors are said to engage directly in mining
heaven
jade, providing the funding to secure the best
concessions and to bring in large-scale machines
to work them.92 Global Witness has heard multiple
Jade has always held a special place in Chinese
accounts of “shadow companies” being used to
culture, as illustrated by the saying: “Gold
circumvent restrictions on foreign investment
has a value; jade is invaluable”.87 Traditionally
involving either Myanmar citizens providing a
associated with royalty and privilege, for today’s
front for Chinese backers, or Chinese individuals
expanding class of rich and super-rich in China
taking Myanmar identities so as to directly control
the stone is a status symbol and this is pushing
companies themselves.93
up demand and prices, particularly for top-quality
jade. Conveniently, the world’s main supplier is
Industry figures described to Global Witness the
right next door.88
joint arrangements which can be set up, with
Chinese backers obtaining machinery using
staggered payment plans or hire purchase
arrangements not available to Myanmar people,
whilst their local partners manage logistics and
connections with high level power brokers.94 One
interviewee recounted being approached by a
Chinese general, who was interested in partnering
up and offered to facilitate the import from China
of large trucks to use in the jade mines.95 He
estimated that the big jade players receive up to
70% of their financing from inside China.96 The use
of front companies to facilitate such arrangements
adds an additional layer of opacity, making it even
more difficult to work out who is really being given
Jade is highly prized in China and is traditionally associated with
royalty and status. Some of the highest profile cases in China’s access to jade and what the implications are.
recent anti-corruption crackdown have involved the seizure of
valuable jade carvings and jewellery. CREDIT: Adam Dean
Nearly all of Myanmar’s jade goes to China, either
formally or informally, and prices depend on
Chinese demand.89 According to several sources
in the business, Chinese President Xi Jinping’s
current corruption crackdown is having a direct
impact on the market and some of the highest
profile corruption cases so far have involved jade.
For example, over a hundred kilograms of jade
was seized from the basement of the former vice
chairman of China’s Central Military Commission,
General Xu Caihou.90 Former provincial governor
Ni Fake was found to have accepted US$2 million
in bribes, 80% of which were in carved jade, whilst The architect of Myanmar’s independence Aung San, together with
Chairman Mao, overlooks a makeshift showroom in Yingjiang, a jade
mining tycoon Li Huan was accused of paying off
trade hub in Yunnan Province, China, near the border with Kachin
government officials using the gemstone.91 State.

38 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
The rise of the machines in Hpakant today is all about the biggest machines
and the most rapid rate of extraction. This intensity
stems from a series of perverse incentives:
As described in Chapter 4, in the early 1990s,
• The need to pay substantial bribes makes the
Myanmar’s military junta pushed the KIA/KIO out
process of securing a good mine very costly.
of Hpakant and then began parcelling the area
Licence-holders are in a hurry to extract jade
into blocks which it handed out to companies it
as quickly as possible to recoup this initial outlay.98
approved, as a means of consolidating control of
Kachin State’s most valuable resource.97 Since then,
• The short duration of the licences, which typically
the small-scale miners who previously mined the
run for only three or five years, further
area have been squeezed out by state-licensed encourages concessionaires to grab what
companies, which have brought in heavy machinery they can, while they can.99
to carry out large-scale jade extraction. Jade mining
• Because the big companies are, in many cases,
owned or aligned with entrenched military
and ruling party figures, they have everything
to lose if the rules of the game change following
the November 2015 elections or in the event
of an equitable peace agreement between Nay
Pyi Taw and the KIA/KIO.100
The satellite images over the page show the
intensification of jade exploitation over the two
decades that the government has reigned in
Hpakant. The question of who is benefitting from
all of this is explored in the next chapter, where
we profile some of the biggest licensed players
In their haste to dig for jade, the big mining companies have in Myanmar’s jade industry. We then turn to the
recently unleashed “vehicles [the size of] two storey buildings”,
adverse impact of their activities on local people
each costing US$2 million, on Hpakant’s broken landscape.101
in Chapter 3.
Up until the 1990s, jade mining was done by hand and the According to one industry source, a site which a year ago took 30
environmental footprint remained limited. This photo shows days to work can now be mined in only four days. The big question
Hpakant Gyi – at the time the main jade mine – in 1994, the year is who is really benefitting from the huge amounts of jade being
that the KIA/KIO signed a ceasefire with government. extracted from Hpakant?102 CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 39
Expansion of jade mining
in Hpakant since 1988 2015
1988 1994 2005
0 5 km

40 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
CHAPTER 2: WHO’S BENEFITTING?
The secrecy which pervades • ‘Crony’ companies – firms that emerged and
Myanmar’s jade trade makes flourished as proxies and favourites of the
tracking down its real beneficiaries Than Shwe military junta.
extremely difficult. This partly • Drug lords – Myanmar’s most famous drug
explains the lack of international lord Wei Hsueh Kang and associates, some of
whom are subject to US sanctions for narcotics
attention on this issue to date.
trafficking and money laundering.
Global Witness has identified some of the
The table below summarises the official pre-tax
companies receiving licences from the Ministry
sales these major players made at the 2013 and
of Mines / Myanmar Gems Enterprise, and pieced
2014 emporiums. In some cases, buyers at the
together who is really behind them. The main
emporiums failed to make payment so these
players can be divided into four, sometimes
sales were not completed (according to Ministry
overlapping, categories:
of Mines information, only 55% of 2013 sales were
completed; industry sources put the 2014 completion
• Military and ruling party families – families
of retired generals associated with the Than rate at 30%).103 At the same time, as detailed
Shwe military dictatorship and the ruling in Chapter 1, industry estimates indicate that
Union Solidarity and Development Party licensed companies typically smuggle between
(USDP). Some are members of the current 50% and 80% of their jade directly to China.
cabinet. Consequently, these figures do not represent the
• Army companies – notably the infamous true value of jade revenues, but they provide a
Myanma Economic Holdings Limited. useful indication.
Who is making money from jade?
CATEGORY NAME 2014 SALES104 2013 SALES105 TOTAL SALES
Than Shwe family and associated firm
US$116,541,880 US$103,499,788 US$220,041,668
Kywe Wa Sone
Army / USDP
Ohn Myint family US$80,429,544 – US$80,429,544
families
Maung Maung Thein family US$105,430,521 US$36,621,049 US$142,051,570
US$442,522,782
Myanma Economic Holdings Limited US$149,425,506 US$80,492,459 US$229,917,965
Army Myanmar Economic Corporation US$32,000,008 US$20,826,415 US$52,826,423
companies Northern Star US$1,070,355 – US$1,070,355
US$283,814,743
Ever Winner group of companies US$192,457,693 US$123,881,602 US$316,339,295
‘Crony’ Asia World US$27,264,433 US$20,944,520 US$48,208,953
companies Htoo Group US$13,223,634 – US$13,223,634
US$377,771,882
Wei Hsueh Kang / United Wa State
US$43,009,842 US$58,770,400 US$101,780,242
Army-associated
‘Ceasefire
Ruby Dragon Group / Pa-O National
group’-related US$58,637,973 US$46,141,698 US$104,779,671
Organisation-associated
US$206,559,913
GRAND TOTAL US$1,310,669,320

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 41
This should ring serious alarm bells for the The former dictator is widely believed to retain
Myanmar government and its international considerable power through his influence over the
partners. All four of these categories of players still-dominant Myanmar military.107 In June 2015
have much to lose from meaningful political he is reported to have warned Union Solidarity
reform and from peace in Kachin State. Their and Development (USDP) party head Thura Shwe
dominance of the jade business is denying Mann, President Thein Sein and Tatmadaw (armed
opportunities for development to the people of forces) Commander-in-Chief Min Aung Hlaing,
Kachin State and Myanmar as a whole. But the that he might “take things into my own hands”.108
implications go much further. In Myanmar’s In August Thura Shwe Mann, who had recently
current political landscape, money is power. proposed ending the military’s de facto veto on
Everyone wishing to see peace and genuine changes to the constitution, was deposed in a
democracy in Myanmar should urgently consider “palace coup”.109
the implications of allowing hundreds of millions
of dollars a year to be siphoned off by some of the Meanwhile, Than Shwe’s family continues to play
most determined and ruthless opponents of reform. gatekeeper to choice cuts of Myanmar’s economy.
According to one well-respected analyst, money
is the basis for authority in the new Myanmar and
“If you want to do business, you have to deal with
Military and political leaders and
Than Shwe’s family.”110
their families
Previously unpublished government jade concession
maps and company records shows that Than
1. Retired Senior General Than Shwe
Shwe’s sons, Kyaing San Shwe and Htun Naing
Shwe, control two companies called Kyaing
Than Shwe is synonymous with the darkest days International and Myanmar Naing Group which
of military rule in Myanmar. The junta he led have obtained licences to six jade mines in
from 1992-2011 denied citizens their basic human Hpakant. According to a senior Ministry of Mines
rights, undertook vicious counter-insurgency official, mining concessions were handed to the
campaigns and launched bloody crackdowns Kyaing International company without any of the
against opponents.106 usual procedures being followed.111
Whilst former dictator Than Shwe is said to have devolved some of
his control over family businesses to his children and grandchildren,
Officially, Senior General Than Shwe stepped down as Myanmar’s his wife, Daw Kyaing Kyaing, is reported to remain very much
head of state in 2011. However, it is widely believed that he continues involved.112 One of the family’s jade companies is called Kyaing
to exert considerable power through his influence over the still- International. Locals in Hpakant have also named a lake, created
dominant Myanmar military. Is the money his family is making from by a mining crater filling with water, after the former first lady of
jade being used to maintain his behind-the-scenes influence? Myanmar.

42 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
A third firm – Kywe Wa Sone, registered under its industry monitors identify this company as part
English name Richest Gems – is run by a director of the same group of businesses as Kyaing
of Kyaing International and Myanmar Naing Group International.114 Kywe Wa Sone controls a further
named Win Tin, who shares a registered address three jade mines in Hpakant.
with two of Than Shwe’s sons.113 Long-time jade
Hpakant jade mines controlled by Than Shwe family companies and Kywe Wa Sone
NB names of mines typically include a number, such as Maw Sizar (#2)
KYAING INTERNATIONAL MYANMAR NAING GROUP KYWE WA SONE
Maw Sizar (#2)115 Kaday (#5)116 Wah Kye (#6)117
Kyet Paung Chaung Phyar (#1)118 Ma Mone (#5)119 Thaung Cho (#2)120
Myauk Phyu (#1)121 Gwi Hka (#1)122 Ma Mone (#3)123
Figures for the 2014 and 2013 Myanmar Gems If one adds in the sales notched up by the associated
Emporiums show that, across the two sales Kywe Wa Sone company, the total take across the
events, Kyaing International and Myanmar Naing two emporiums leaps to US$220 million.124
Group recorded pre-tax sales of US$70 million.
Jade companies controlled by the family of former Senior General Than Shwe
NOTE: Directorships reflect listings in the DICA company
registry as of October 2015. More complete DICA records from
October 2014 indicate that directors are also shareholders. NAMED
SPOUSE
AFTER
Figures for the 2014 and 2013 Myanmar Gems Emporiums
show that, across the two sales events, Kyaing International,
Myanmar Naing Group and Kywe Wa Sone recorded pre-tax Than Shwe Kyaing Kyaing Maw Sizar
Kyaing Lake
sales of jade of US$220 million.
SHARED
REGISTERED
SON SON SON ADDRESS
SPOUSE
Thant Zaw Khin Thanda Htun Naing Kyaing San Win Tin
Shwe Shwe a.k.a Shwe
Htun Htun Naing
CHAIRMAN
DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR DIRECTOR
MYANMAR KYAING KYWE WA
NAING INTERNA- SONE GEMS
GROUP TIONAL (RICHEST
GEMS GEMS GEMS)

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 43
The relationship between the Than Shwe family The Than Shwe’s family’s stake in a corrupt and
jade empire and China is unclear, but many claim militarised jade business poses a serious challenge
that the family’s jade mining operations are, in to reformers’ efforts to bring real change
practice, undertaken by Chinese nationals.125 The to Myanmar’s extractive industries, and to
Kyaing and Naing companies are also reported to peacemakers’ attempts to forge a lasting
operate in partnership with a group of companies settlement in Kachin State. But the potential
associated with the United Wa State Army / United repercussions stretch well beyond Kachin. The
Wa State Party (UWSA/UWSP), which is profiled former dictator’s family is famous for its lavish
later in this report.126 Until recently Kywe Wa Sone weddings, luxury real estate and extravagant
shared a director with Wa firm Tet Kham Gems, shopping trips.132 But as Myanmar prepares for
which is run by Aik Haw, the son-in-law of UWSA/ historic elections and a possible political transition,
UWSP leader Pao Yu Hsiang.127 Tet Kham Gems, some fear hardliners may use their illicit wealth
Aik Haw and Pao Yu Hsiang are all on the US to finance sectarian violence and political dirty
sanctions list because of their links to the narcotics tricks.133 Myanmar’s people urgently need answers
business.128 on what Than Shwe’s family are doing with their
ill-gotten jade loot.
The Than Shwe family’s mining in Hpakant is
heavily mechanised and takes little account of the
interests of local people living in the area.129 Their
companies’ concessions are protected by armed
military and police officers who are charged with
deterring unwanted visitors.130 Such is the notoriety
of the Kyaing International company that the
flooded mine crater gouged into the famous Maw
Sizar jade tract where the firm operates has been
named ‘Maw Sizar Kyaing Lake’ after Than Shwe’s
wife, Daw Kyaing Kyaing.131
A still from a video of the ostentatious wedding of Than Shwe’s
daughter, Thandar Shwe to army major Zaw Phyo Win which was
leaked to the press in 2006.134 The clip provided a glimpse into the
family’s lavish lifestyle, sparking outrage as people questioned
where the money for the ropes of jewels, rounds of champagne and
multi-million dollar gifts was coming from.
According to one commentator, “if you want to do business in
Myanmar, you have to deal with Than Shwe’s family”.135 The
business interests of Than Shwe’s sons Htun Naing Shwe and
A villager looks on as dump trucks from the Than Shwe family’s Kyaing San Shwe extend beyond jade. They are widely reported to
Kyaing International mine pass by, Seng Ja Bum village, Hpakant. be the owners of the J’s Donuts chain of pastry shops in Myanmar.
CREDIT: Minzayar CREDIT: Minzayar

44 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
2. Minister for Livestock, Fisheries • Its managing director and 40% shareholder
and Rural Development Ohn Myint is Kyaw Thiha, which is the name of Ohn
Myint’s son.140
• Another director and owner of 30% of the
company’s shares is Daw Nway Ei Ei Zin,
“I dare to slap anybody’s face.”
which is the name of Kyaw Thiha’s wife.141
Minister Ohn Myint
Government maps and a KIA/KIO register of
jade mines designate Myanmar Win Gate as the
Minister Ohn Myint has long exercised considerable concessionaire for the Wah Kye (#5) and Gwi Hka
influence over the fate of Hpakant’s resources. Lone (#4) mines in Hpakant.142 Army company
His previous roles include member of parliament Myanma Economic Holdings Limited has told
for Hpakant and Tatmadaw Northern Commander Global Witness that Myanmar Win Gate is one of
– the top general in Kachin State.136 Many Kachins its jade mining partners.143
accuse Ohn Myint of exploiting his Northern
Myanmar Win Gate did not figure in the unpublished
Commander position to solicit bribes, seize a
2013 Myanmar Gems Emporium figures reviewed
share of major jade finds, promote the jade
by Global Witness. But at the 2014 event, the
businesses of ‘crony’ companies, and sow division
company posted pre-tax sales of US$80 million.144
amongst the different ethnic and political groups
This included the sale of a single 24 kilogram
in the state.137
piece of jade for nearly US$40 million.145
According to jade industry sources, Ohn Myint’s
family owns a lucrative jade mining venture A military history enthusiast, Ohn
called Myanmar Win Gate, which is named after Myint has reportedly named his jade
company after British Major-General
British World War II general Orde Wingate.138 DICA Orde Wingate, the commander of
company records show that: a special operations force which
operated in Myanmar during World
War II.
• Myanmar Win Gate Gems and Jewellery Min-
ing Co. Ltd was incorporated in 2007, during
Ohn Myint’s tenure as Tatmadaw Northern
Commander in Kachin State.139
In 2005, Ohn Myint was appointed Northern
Commander, a military post which gave him
exceptional power over the administration,
economy and local population in Kachin State.
Today, he holds the civilian post of Minister of
Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development,
but he retains an interest in Kachin State
through his family’s Myanmar Win Gate jade
company.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 45
The Minister for Livestock, Fisheries, Rural Development… and slapping
Minister Ohn Myint hit the headlines in 2014 following a speech he gave to a group of villagers in Magwe
Division who had requested a water purification system:
“There is no country who really loves Myanmar or helps us. They may f*** your front or
maybe the back. Ok? f*** your front or back. No one is giving you anything for free.”
“I am sent from the Army, I am not a politician. I am not elected, but selected. So you know
about this, I am telling you.”
“I don’t give a f*** about any politicians. You guys remember! I have been giving speeches
saying that I am General Ohn Myint – General Ohn Myint who is travelling all over and I dare
to slap anybody’s face.”
“I will begin with political language. The political language is to attack to those who insult the
ruling government. If a verbal attack from me does not work, they will be put in jail. This is
as it is practiced internationally. Those that oppose the government, go! Stay in jail. You be
released when our government’s term ends. That’s it.”146
These comments prompted a protest in Yangon in which the demonstrators challenged the minister to
come and slap them.147

46 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
3. Former Ruling Party General Two jade businessmen with extensive knowledge
Secretary Maung Maung Thein of the key players in Hpakant told Global Witness
that Maung Maung Thein controls both Myat
Yamon and Myo Nwe jade mining companies,
Retired general Maung Maung Thein is the
recently deposed General Secretary of the ruling which are listed in government maps as running
Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP), the Kaday (#2) and Ma Na (#1) mines.150 Local
a former fisheries minister and a member of the people living near the Kaday (#2) mine also
Pyithu Hluttaw (lower) chamber of Myanmar’s identified Maung Maung Thein as the owner of
parliament.148 He has a reputation as a political Myat Yamon.151
hardliner. Global Witness has previously
uncovered evidence of his son’s involvement in
These statements are supported by other data,
illegal logging.149
notably company registry records, which show that:
• Myat Yamon and Myo Nwe companies share an
office, as well as a director and shareholder.152
• One of Myo Nwe’s three listed directors and
shareholders is Nay Aung, which is the name
of one of Maung Maung Thein’s sons, according
to the politician’s profile on the Myanmar
parliament website.153
• Myo Nwe director Nay Aung’s NRC
(national registration card) number
(13/KAMANA(NAING)001592) immediately
precedes that of Maung Maung Thein’s son
Min Thein: (13/KAMANA(NAING)001593),
suggesting that the two were registered in the
same township at the same time.154
It is possible, just, that the Nay Aung involved in
Myo Nwe company is not the brother of Min Thein
but coincidentally has the same name and
registered for an NRC card at the same time and
place as Min Thein did. However, it is common in
Myanmar for families to register more than one
child at a time and therefore for siblings to be
issued with sequential or near-sequential NRC
numbers.155
Global Witness wrote to Myo Nwe director Nay
Aung and put it to him that he was the son of
Maung Maung Thein and that Maung Maung Thein
Retired general Maung Maung Thein was, until recently, the General was the beneficial owner of Myat Yamon and Myo
Secretary of the ruling Union Solidarity and Development Party.
Nwe companies. Nay Aung replied to say that he
Reputedly a political hardliner, Maung Maung Thein is behind two
jade mining companies which recorded official pre-tax sales of over would not be able to answer the questions at this
US$140 million in 2013 and 2014.
time.156

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 47
Myat Yamon mine site Kaday (#2), Kaday Village, near Lone Khin, Hpakant. According to locals the Myat Yamon mine is one of the most heavily
guarded in Hpakant and conditions are notoriously dangerous. CREDIT: Minzayar
Waste water draining from the Myat Yamon site near Kaday Village, Hpakant. According to local residents, water from a drainage channel created by
the company has destroyed nearby homes. CREDIT: Minzayar

48 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Flooded crater left by Myat Yamon company, Hpakant. CREDIT: Minzayar
Stills from a video of a massive mud slide that took place at the Myat Yamon Kaday (#2) mine in April 2015. Local residents put the death toll at 30
to 60 people. The accident is said to have occurred due to the company’s persistent dumping of tailings on a bed of liquid mud above the mine. The
waste then shifted and flooded into the crater, engulfing workers and machines in its path.
According to local residents, the Myat Yamon mine But this poor safety record has not stopped
is one of the most heavily guarded in Hpakant, and Maung Maung Thein companies generating eye-
conditions are notoriously dangerous.157 In April watering sums of money. At the Myanmar Gems
2015, a torrent of mud and waste water ripped Emporiums in 2014 and 2013, the Myat Yamon and
through Myat Yamon’s Kaday (#2) mine, killing Myo Nwe companies and joint ventures recorded
between 30 and 60 people, according to local between them pre-tax sales over US$140 million.
residents.158

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 49
4. The tip of the iceberg? In addition to these heavyweight figures, Global
Witness’ investigation found other big hitters in
Myanmar’s ruling party holding interests in the
“We have heard that most
Global Witness: jade trade, including two deputy ministers:
jade mining companies probably have
involvement from military families.
• Retired General Phone Swe is Deputy Minister
Does that fit with your
for Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement.
understanding?”
As such, he is responsible for the wellbeing of
100,000 people in Kachin State who have been
“Not probably, definitely! If
Former official:
displaced by a conflict that relates, at least
military families do not have a jade
in part, to the jade that his Shwe Innwa Gems
mining company the others will kick
company is mining.160
them out. Those without one will be
seen as black sheep. They will not be
speaking the same language.”159 • Deputy Minister for Communications and
Information Technology Win Than was
previously a major general, director of defence
procurement in the Ministry of Defence and
managing director of Myanma Economic
Holdings Limited.161 DICA records retrieved in
October 2014 list him as the sole shareholder
of Myanmar Imperial Jade (Gems & Jewellery)
Co. Ltd, which is MEHL’s main jade-mining
and trading subsidiary.162
When MEHL agreed to meet with Global Witness
in February this year, the army company proposed
that General Win Than attend the meeting as a
company representative.163 In a letter sent
subsequently to Global Witness, MEHL denied that
he was a shareholder in Myanmar Imperial Jade,
however.164 MEHL’s role in the jade business is
profiled in the next section.
We believe that these findings are just the tip
of the iceberg. Many familiar with the jade
business say that if you crack the shell of any
major jade company, you will find a military
family inside. This is the question reformers
should be most worried about: who else in the
Deputy Minister for Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement, Phone USDP / Tatmadaw hierarchy is benefitting from
Swe, is another USDP party heavyweight with a stake in Myanmar’s
Kachin State’s jade?
lucrative jade industry.

50 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Army companies
Companies controlled by military families cast a
long shadow over the jade business, but that is not
the end of the Tatmadaw’s involvement. The
army also has its own, formally constituted,
conglomerates which make huge sums from jade.
Previously unpublished figures from the 2014
and 2013 Myanmar Gems Emporiums show that
across the two events, these firms collectively
recorded pre-tax sales of at least US$280 million.165
This begs the inevitable questions of where the
Myanma Economic Holdings Limited has faced controversy over its
money is going and whether it is being used to joint venture copper mining project in Letpadaung. Accusations of
land grabbing and violence against protestors, including the use of
wage the government’s war against the KIA/KIO in white phosphorus, have made the project notorious within Myanmar
and beyond. CREDIT: Burma Partnership/Han Win Aung
Kachin State.
The Tatmadaw’s top-ranking
MEHL and jade: “The sleeping
business: Myanma Economic
Holdings Limited166 partner that takes the lion’s share ”171
MEHL is a prominent player in Myanmar’s extractive
Global Witness is aware of at least four army
companies involved in jade mining: Myanma industries and its Letpadaung copper mine
Economic Holdings Limited (MEHL), Myanmar project has faced persistent allegations of land-
Economic Corporation (MEC), Shwe Innwa Gems grabbing, pollution and the use of violence against
(mentioned in previous section) and Northern Star protestors.172 There has been far less scrutiny of
Gems.167 The most important and notorious of its extensive portfolio of jade mines, however.
these is the US government-sanctioned Myanma
Economic Holdings Limited (MEHL). Over the MEHL first became involved in jade mining in 1995
years this sprawling company has profited from
after the government took control of Hpakant
exclusive licences to import high value products,
from the KIA/KIO, and it proceeded to dominate
from tax exemptions and from foreign investors
the business for the next decade.173 During this
being forced to make joint ventures with it.168
period the conglomerate helped itself to large
Along with its sister company MEC, it is broadly
tracts of the best jade land, over the heads of the
understood to provide off-budget finance for
Ministry of Mines.174 Many of the main jade mining
secret military projects and an income stream for
companies in Hpakant worked as its subcontractors.175
retired army officers.169
One notable case is Xie Family Company, profiled
later in this report, one of whose directors is the
Some analysts have highlighted how MEHL and
joint venture partner of Coca-Cola in Myanmar.176
MEC have had their wings clipped by economic
MEHL also organised its own jade auctions.177
reforms that have trimmed their de facto
monopolies, yet others suggest that behind the
scenes their grip on important revenue flows Things began to change from April 2000 when,
remains significant.170 Our research suggests jade under the auspices of Military Intelligence chief
is one such example. and State Peace and Development Council (Than

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 51
Shwe junta) Secretary Number One Khin Nyunt, MEHL confirmed that it works through joint
the government began encouraging private venture partners, which are said to include a
number of Chinese companies.186 The partners
companies to enter into joint ventures with the
MEHL named included the Myanmar Win Gate
Ministry of Mines.178 Hereafter MEHL’s dominance
company owned by the family of Minister Ohn
diminished, but it has remained one of the largest
Myint and Jing Hpaw Aung, which is owned by
and most formidable of the jade mining companies
KBZ Group.187 MEHL stated that the production
in Hpakant.179 In the words of one long-time split with its partners was a secret but is generally
observer of the gems and minerals business, 20% for the army firm and 80% for the private
“MEHL is as powerful as ever.”180 company.188 This contrasts with the accounts of
four businessmen that have partnered with MEHL
and one industry representative, who all say that
In February 2015 MEHL met with Global Witness
MEHL takes a 40% share.189
to discuss its mining ventures and its participation
in the EITI. For a company which has a reputation
MEHL says that it follows the rules laid down by
for opacity, this was an encouraging move.181 the Ministry of Mines and that its jade mining is
The MEHL officials – who included Colonel Khin not regulated by the military.190 However others
Maung Latt, the managing director of subsidiary in the jade trade characterise the conglomerate
as a thuggish entity which seizes mines and foists
firm Myanmar Imperial Jade Company – emphasised
itself on other concessionaires with impunity,
their awareness of, and support for EITI as follows:
often in collaboration with ‘crony’ companies such
as Tay Za’s Htoo Trading.191 In a letter to Global
“EITI is a unique opportunity for the extractives
Witness, MEHL denied these charges.192
industry… MEHL will cooperate with whatever EITI
requires. Working with other companies, we’ll Another allegation made by a sometime partner
of MEHL is that the army company uses the
comply with Myanmar EITI and with higher EITI
emergency powers provision of the Myanmar
authorities.”182
Penal Code – Section 144 – to seize valuable
jade land for its mining operations: “Everyone is
The company representatives also made several
scared of Section 144, even children. 144 means
specific comments with regard to the MEHL jade they’ll shoot us if we go there. If they have 144,
business. Some of these confirm statements they can do what they like.”193 One Myanmar Gems
made by other industry sources while others Enterprise map reviewed by Global Witness
marks an area near San Hkar village bordering a
present a very different picture:
MEHL mining concession as a Section 144 zone,
but it is not clear whether it is being mined or
MEHL says that it is not a leading company in the
not.194 In response to this accusation, MEHL says
jade mining business and has licences to only
that “MEHL does not have the authority to enact
150-200 acres of jade mines in Kachin State.183 Section 144. Only the Ministry of Home Affairs has
But this does not tally with data from official the authority to enact and announce Section 144
documents and testimony from those in the in accordance with procedures.”195
business. Government maps designate around
The head of MEHL’s Myanmar Imperial Jade
300 acres as licensed to MEHL.184 This does not
subsidiary, Colonel Khin Maung Latt, describes
include mines run under the names of joint
it as a management company and explained that
venture partners. One such partner estimates
MEHL relies on its partners to carry out the
MEHL’s share of Hpakant’s jade tracts to run to actual mining operations.196 This fits with the
1,000 acres in all.185 accounts from a firm that has previously partnered

52 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
with MEHL. This partner describes how the army for publicly disclosing such data as its licences,
firm appoints a military officer, usually a retired ownership of extractive companies, including
major, as its representative at mine sites in which subsidiaries and joint ventures, contracts, payments
it has a stake.197 Companies are said to regard the to the government and shares of production and
officers as a nuisance because they have limited other revenues collected in kind. Ultimately what
knowledge of jade or how to run a business but is required, however, is for the Nay Pyi Taw
insist on giving the orders.198 In one case this government and legislators to draw a line under
interference is reported to have been so extreme the era of the military conglomerate by passing
that the MEHL partner asked the Ministry of legislation that prohibits the military, police
Mines to cancel its mining licence.199 Others in the and other security services, and their individual
business similarly complain that MEHL’s parasitic serving officers, from establishing, operating, or
behaviour stops its partners turning a profit.200 exercising beneficial ownership over companies.
Some evidently see MEHL staff’s ignorance as
an advantage however. One jade businessman
noted that partner companies could just show the
military officers “something green” as evidence of
their mining production and smuggle the rest of
the jade out under their noses.201 Another stated
that whenever companies found valuable jade they
would simply bribe the MEHL representative not
to enter it in their stock records.202 In a letter to
Global Witness, MEHL stated that “We have been
instructed not to accept any bribes or engage in
any bribery... We also impose very strict policies
on all our employees with regard to such actions.
Any employee found to be engaged in bribery will
be subject to penalties or legal proceedings.”203 An allegation made against Myanmar army company MEHL is that
it uses the emergency powers provisions of the Penal Code to take
control of areas of Hpakant, and keep others out. CREDIT: Minzayar
Pension fund or war chest?
At the 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium MEHL’s
Myanmar Imperial Jade subsidiary recorded the
second highest sales figures of any company, with
private and joint venture lots together totalling
almost US$150 million.204 MEHL representatives
bristle at the suggestion that their ventures pay
for defence procurement and insist that revenues
are spent only on the welfare of soldiers’ families
and national development.205 But both MEHL and
sister company MEC have their work cut out to
persuade the public that they are something other
than “an immense slush fund on behalf of military
leadership” or, worse still, one of the major cogs
What do the army companies do with the jade revenues they
in the Tatmadaw’s war machine in Kachin State.206
receive? MEHL disputes allegations that it is a slush fund for the
Myanmar army, insisting that its jade money is spent instead on the
welfare of soldiers’ families and national development. Full
In this regard, MEHL’s support for EITI is a good
transparency is essential to put the rumours to rest and address
start and provides the company with a platform public fears about where the jade money is going.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 53
Crony companies of KBZ Group of Companies, and media mogul
Kyaw Win, the owner of the Shwe Than Lwin
companies. The relationship between KBZ and
Ever Winner is described in more detail in the next
The military are not the only ones who benefit
section. A further hint of high level connections
from Myanmar’s vast jade trade at the expense of
comes in the form of the Buddha statue made
ordinary people and the environment. A number of
major jade companies are owned by or otherwise from Ever Winner jade which President Thein Sein
associated with ‘crony’ tycoons with connections presented to a pagoda in China in June 2014.207
to the pre-2011 military junta. Again, this poses
a serious potential obstacle to reform and In 2014 companies that Global Witness believes
underscores the need to bring greater to be members of the Ever Winner group together
transparency to the jade sector, particularly with partner firms recorded pre-tax sales of over
regarding companies’ ultimate beneficial US$190 million at the Myanmar Gems Emporium.
ownership, as quickly as possible. In 2013 the group and its partners posted
combined pre-tax sales of over US$120 million.208
1. Ever Winner
The Ever Winner web
Ever Winner is one of the most powerful clusters
of jade companies and its role exemplifies many Ever Winner has been a major force in the jade
of the most troubling aspects of the business. The business for at least a decade. The big boss is
group’s origins, ownership, and operations are Aike Htwe, also known by the Chinese name
obscure. It controls and benefits from some of Zhang Yingchun. At least two of his five daughters
Kachin State’s most valuable assets and yet members are also involved in the business.209 Aike Htwe’s
of the public – whether Kachin or Myanmar – have key lieutenants are Dr Tun Kyi, who is said to be
no access to information about what it is taking his brother-in-law, and Dr Saw Lin, who is also
from Hpakant, or where the money goes. reported by some sources to be a relative by
marriage.210 These two men manage a range of
Ever Winner has close connections with politically associated jade mining ventures for the Ever Winner
influential tycoons, notably Aung Ko Win, the head group, as described in the chart on page 55.211
In June 2014, President Thein Sein presented
this Buddha statue made from Ever Winner
jade to a pagoda in China. This hints at the high
level connections those behind the Ever
Winner group may have, and underlines the
need for greater transparency regarding who
these individuals are.

54 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
One of the sites mined for jade by Ever Winner, near Nam Maw, Hpakant. The Ever Winner group is one of the most powerful players in the
business, and is connected to politically influential tycoons; yet the group’s origins, ownership and operations remain obscure. CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 55
Connections between Myanmar’s biggest jade business and its biggest bank: the Ever Winner group and KBZ
DIRECTOR
JING HPAW
AUNG JADE
SUBSIDIARY
Aung Ko Win
DIRECTOR CHAIRMAN
FORMER
DIRECTOR CLOSE FRIENDS RUBY MINES PARTNERS IN
DIRECTOR MANAGER JADE
INVESTOR BUSINESS
MYANMA ECONOMIC
FATHER HOLDINGS LIMITED
Kyi Kyi Htwe Ei Ei Htwe Aike Htwe a.k.a Wai Wai Htwe (Subject to US
Zhang Yingchun
sanctions)
SISTERS ? PROVIDED
FATHER DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR START-UP
DIRECTOR CAPITAL OF TRADING DIRECTOR
ARM
MAIN JADE
BUSINESS
CHAIRMAN
YADANAR MANAGERS EVER YADANAR
BAYANI
SHWE YI WINNER PYI PHYO
GEMS
WIN GEMS GEMS AUNG GEMS
BROTHERS
SELL JADE
IN-LAW
TOGETHER
DIRECTOR MANAGES DIRECTOR
SHARE ADDRESS TRADING ARM
SHARE ADDRESS
SHARE ADDRESS (SPOUSE?)
(SPOUSE?)
DIRECTOR
Yin Yin Aye Dr Saw Lin Dr Tun Kyi Kyi Kyi Aye
DIRECTOR DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR FORMER
DIRECTOR SHAREHOLDER
DIRECTOR
LINN LETT
YADANAR KHINE ARS KAUNG THAN LWIN
MYITSONE WIN PHO THAR
SIN THIRI MYANMAR INTERNA- MYAT AYEYAR
AYAR GEMS YADANAR HTOO GEMS
TRADING GEMS TIONAL THUKHA GEMS
GEMS
SHARE ADDRESS
DIRECTOR
CHAIRMAN OPERATES
At the 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium the Ever Winner
group of jade companies and its partners recorded SHWE
combined pre-tax sales of over US$190 million. At the 2013 THAN LWIN
Emporium the total stood at over US$120 million. GROUP (Satellite TV)
NOTE: Directorships reflect listings in the DICA company registry as of
Kyaw Win
October 2015. More complete DICA records from October 2014 indicate that
directors are also shareholders.

56 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Aike Htwe is described by his former employer KBZ In a letter to Global Witness, Aike Htwe’s daughter
as “the most successful jade miner in Myanmar” Ei Ei Htwe stated that she was a director of Yadanar
and by a Chinese commentator as Myanmar’s Shwe Yi Win Gems and not a director of Ever Winner.
largest jade mine owner.212 Chinese media and However, she did give answers to questions about
government publications state that he is the Ever Winner and she denied that it is a group of
honorary vice-president of the Chinese Jewellery companies. She added that “My family members
and Jade Industry Association and the Chairman have invested in Yadanar Pyi Phyo Aung Gems and
of the Yunnan Chamber of Commerce in Yangon.213 Bayani Gems along with other business investors.
However, these companies have different
Like several other big jade mining firms, Ever management teams with different shareholders
Winner is in fact a web of companies which have and they are not under Ever Winner. The rest of
different names but are known to people in the the companies that are mentioned in the letter
business and residents of Hpakant as part of the [the eight firms indicated in the bottom row of the
same entity.214 The use of a range of names may Ever Winner chart] are not related to Ever Winner.”216
be an attempt to disguise the scale of the Ever
Winner group’s dominance of the jade business In legal terms, this may be correct: Ever Winner is
and its ultimate beneficial ownership. Company not incorporated as a group, neither does it have
registry records that show overlapping directorships formally listed subsidiaries. However, in practice
and shareholdings, as well as government it does appear to operate as an association of
documents and testimony from jade businessmen inter-related firms.
and local residents, suggest that there are at
least a dozen Ever Winner companies active in
Hpakant or in selling jade.215 The Ever Winner group’s fatal footprint
Like the Than Shwe family-run Kyaing International,
Dr Tun Kyi is reported to be Ever Winner’s imprint on Hpakant is now so
the brother-in-law of Ever
indelible that it has a flooded mine crater – Ever
Winner boss Aike Htwe, and
is a manager for the Ever Lake – named after it.217 The group is one of a
Winner Trading company. small number of jade mining ventures that have
He is the director of three
recently deployed exceptionally large Komatsu
firms that are part of the
Ever Winner jade mining PC2000 backhoe diggers to accelerate their jade
group: Lin Lett Win Yadanar,
production. According to one machinery supplier,
Pho Thar Htoo Gems and
Kaung Myat Thukha, and is Ever Winner has recently purchased 40 such
a shareholder in a fourth – machines, each weighing around 200 tonnes and
ARS International.
priced at US$2 million apiece.218
‘Ever Lake’ in Seng Ja Bum
Village, Hpakant; so-called
because it was formed from a
crater caused by the Ever
Winner company’s past mining
operations. Now it serves as
a dumping ground for mining
companies looking to dispose of
waste from their operations and
locals fear the lake may overflow
and cause flooding.
CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 57
The Ever Winner companies have a poor safety nearest private sector rival. What is it doing that
record when it comes to disposing of the waste its competitors are not? Does jade provide part of
from their mining operations. Yadanar Sin Thiri, the answer and, if so, where and whom is it coming
managed by Dr Saw Lin, was one of three firms from?221
that were using a tailings dump in the Maw Mau
Bum area which collapsed in early January 2015,
killing a number of jade hand-pickers.219 In March,
a machine owned by another Ever Winner group
company, Lin Lett Win Yadanar, which is run by
Dr Tun Kyi, killed a jade hand picker at a tailings
dump near Lone Khin. The victim’s family claim
that the company refused their requests for
compensation.220
Kanbawza or KBZ Group is one of Myanmar’s largest businesses
and by far the largest bank. Has jade helped KBZ head Aung Ko
Win outgrow his rivals? KBZ claims it has not been involved in jade
mining in Hpakant since 2003, but a range of sources tell a different
story. CREDIT: Minzayar
Competing histories
KBZ has won a range of awards, internationally
The accessories of a small-scale miner named Zaw Win Maung
as well as in Myanmar.222 It tops the Ministry of
who died in March this year, leaving behind a wife and five-year-
old son, after being hit by a backhoe digger at a waste dump being Finance’s list of Income Tax-paying companies for
used by the Ever Winner-associated company Lin Lett Win Yadanar.
the financial year 2013-2014.223 It also came out
The miner’s family says that the company has not taken any
responsibility for his death and has refused requests for top in a 2014 survey of leading Myanmar companies’
compensation. CREDIT: Minzayar
levels of transparency by the Myanmar Centre for
Responsible Business and third in the equivalent
index in 2015.224 Its code of conduct contains an
anti-corruption policy.225 Unusually for a Myanmar
2. KBZ Group
company, it has a statement about its beneficial
ownership on its website.226
Kanbawza, or KBZ Group, owned by tycoon Aung
Ko Win and his family, is one of Myanmar’s biggest
While the company’s commitment to greater
companies and includes the country’s largest
transparency is laudable, its relationship with the
bank. KBZ has a dedicated jade mining subsidiary,
jade business remains opaque. In meetings and
but in meetings and correspondence with Global
correspondence with Global Witness, KBZ has
Witness has stressed that it plays only a small downplayed its role. Company representatives say
part in the industry. that KBZ mined jade at the Hpakant Gyi (#2) mine
in Hpakant from 2000-2003 but then stopped
According to a leading economic analyst, KBZ’s because of risks of environmental damage and
bank is now around three times larger than its civil unrest.227 They add that they then switched

58 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
their attention to Hkamti, a deposit in Sagaing
Division that is generally considered far less
productive than Hpakant.228 KBZ says that the only
jade it now trades is from its two Hkamti mines
and that it has no activities in Hpakant.229
Other sources suggest a rather different chronology
and level of involvement in Hpakant, however. A
2008 US Embassy cable, which reported on a
meeting with Aung Ko Win, describes him as
“owner of several jade and gem mines in Mong Hsu
[a ruby mining site in Shan State] and Hpakant”.230
Meanwhile, a KBZ 2011 brochure states that
The 2011 presentation shows a series of images of large-scale jade
the company mines jade in Hpakant, as well as mining operations – all of them taken in Hpakant…
Hkamti.231 It reinforces the point with a set of jade
mining photos that all depict Hpakant and adds
that “Sales of Jades and Gems for KBZ Group
[are] US$40-50 million each emporium; apart
from record sales.”232 KBZ has decorated its
bank branches with similar photos of jade mining
operations in Hpakant, many of which were taken
some years after it says it left the area.233
According to a consultant to the company and
also a senior jade industry figure, KBZ did this to
demonstrate that its capital came from jade
rather than drugs.234
pictures of jade lots sold for massive amounts in different
emporiums, including these three stones which sold for over 33
million euros in 2011…
KBZ told Global Witness that it has not been involved in mining jade
in Hpakant since 2003, instead operating two mines in Hkamti,
Sagaing Division – an area considered much less productive than
Hpakant. This seems inconsistent with a presentation given by KBZ
itself in 2011 which indicates that, at that time, the group was still
active in Hpakant and making sales worth US$40-50 million at and this picture of KBZ Chairman Aung Ko Win showing a large
each jade and gems emporium. piece of jade to Myanmar President Thein Sein.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 59
KBZ and Ever Winner – just good KBZ’s camouflaged partnership
friends? with the Myanmar army
KBZ has told Global Witness that it has “has never
“KBZ is transparent in its dealings
entered into business of any nature with MEHL
with all stakeholders” and has no intention to do so.”244 However, data
from the June 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium
KBZ Code of Conduct235
records that KBZ jade mining subsidiary Jing
Hpaw Aung racked up US$24 million in pre-tax
jade sales and that all of these were made in
According to a well-placed source in the jade
partnership with Myanmar Imperial Jade Co.
business, KBZ boss Aung Ko Win has a long
Ltd, which is a subsidiary of Myanma Economic
association with Ever Winner supremo Aike Htwe
Holdings Limited.245 In a letter to Global Witness,
and has partnered with him in the jade business.236 MEHL confirmed that Jing Hpaw Aung is its
For its part, KBZ has told Global Witness that the partner in the jade business.246
company provided the start-up capital for Ever
Winner, that Aike Htwe is a former ruby mines
KBZ’s mining assessment plan and
manager for KBZ and that he is a close friend of
the need to go further and faster
Aung Ko Win.237 According to one of KBZ’s business
partners, the two men also have a familial connection KBZ’s advisors shared with Global Witness an
via a “nephew” of Aung Ko Win who is the husband outline of a proposed internal assessment of
of Aike Htwe’s daughter Wai Wai Htwe.238 KBZ KBZ’s mining portfolio. Encouragingly, this
suggests that the company may, in the future,
denies this, however.
disclose information about mine locations, mining
activities and ownership share, as well as land
KBZ also denies that Aung Ko Win is a beneficial
acquisition.247
owner of Ever Winner but confirms what company
records show: that Aike Htwe’s daughters are Global Witness believes that if KBZ wants to live
directors and shareholders of its new insurance up to its rhetoric on transparency it needs to go
much further and faster, however. In meetings with
company, IKBZ.239 IKBZ’s other directors and
top KBZ managers and also in writing, we have
shareholders are Aung Ko Win, his wife and their
suggested that the Group makes an immediate
two daughters.240 KBZ says that Aike Htwe is not
disclosure of data covered by the EITI standard
a beneficial owner of the insurer.241 However Aike
such as:
Htwe’s daughter informed Global Witness that he
is, in fact, an investor in IKBZ.242 • location, type and duration of the jade mining
licences KBZ holds;
• the beneficial owners of KBZ’s jade mine
What to make of all this? If Aike Htwe is a hidden
ventures and their level of ownership;
owner of IKBZ, might Aung Ko Win in turn be a
• payments to the government over the past year,
hidden owner of Ever Winner, or at least a partner
regarding each KBZ jade mining concession;
in its astonishingly lucrative jade business? KBZ • total production volumes and the value of
denies this.243 But these rebuttals would carry production from each of KBZ’s jade mines;
• details of the contracts between KBZ and the
more weight if both KBZ and Ever Winner
government to mine jade; and
published evidence of the beneficial ownership of
• arrangements KBZ has with state-owned
each of their jade mining operations and of their
enterprises such as Myanmar Gems Enterprise
relationship with one another.
and MEHL.

60 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
3. Asiaworld
Asiaworld, another of Myanmar’s largest companies,
was established by Kokang drug lord Lo Hsing-Han
and his son, Steven Law, who currently runs the
business and is on the US sanctions list.248
Asiaworld is widely reported to have had close
relations with senior State Peace and Development
Council (SPDC) generals, including Than Shwe,
his number two Maung Aye and Tin Aung Myint
Oo, who later served as vice president in the
post-2011 Thein Sein government.249
In Kachin State, Asiaworld is best known for its
role as a partner in the controversial Myitsone
Dam hydropower project which President Thein
Sein suspended in 2011.250 However, recent
research by Global Witness shows it also operates
a major jade mining company in Hpakant called
Yadanar Taung Tann Gems which, according to Steven Law, the son of Kokang drug lord Lo Hsing-Han, currently
runs one of Myanmar’s largest conglomerates, Asiaworld, and
official figures, notched up pre-tax jade sales
controls jade mines through the Yadanar Taung Tann Gems company.
of US$27 million in 2014 and US$21 million the He is on the US sanctions list and Asiaworld is widely reported to
have had close relationships with senior figures from the military
previous year.251 junta, including former dictator Than Shwe, his number two Maung
Aye and Tin Aung Myint Oo, who later became vice president.
Mr Asiaworld’s jade mines
commented that “Canadian immigration officials
During a review of company records retrieved in
failed to do their job properly screening this
October 2014, Global Witness noticed that Steven
individual under our immigration laws”.255
Law – under his Burmese and Chinese names
Htun Myint Naing and Lo Ping Zhong – was listed
Yadanar Taung Tann has a large jade mine at
as managing director and shareholder of Yadanar
Met Lin Chaung (#2), west of Hpakant Town.256
Taung Tann, alongside another director named ‘Mr
Two well-informed sources told Global Witness
Asiaworld’.252 In February 2015 we wrote to Steven
that the company also has jade mines in the Gwi
Law, to request a meeting about the potential
Hka area south of Hpakant.257 Official maps lend
for making the jade business more transparent
weight to this claim, showing that Gwi Hka Joint
through EITI. Mr Law did not reply and, as of
Venture (#7) is held by Dagon Yadanar Gems Co.
September 2015, the names Htun Myint Naing
Ltd, a firm controlled by two of Yadanar Taung
and Lo Ping Zhong had been removed from the Tann’s directors.258 One of these two directors,
company registry entry for Yadanar Taung Tann.253 Law Sni Chant, has a six digit NRC number that
is the same as Steven Law’s aside from the final
It was in the guise of Lo Ping Zhong of Yadanar two numbers.259 The similarities in name and NRC
Taung Tann Gems, however, that Steven Law number could indicate a familial relationship;
gained entry to Canada as part of a Burmese however Steven Law declined to respond to written
government trade delegation in June 2014.254 A questions on this and other aspects of his jade
Canadian government spokesman subsequently business.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 61
An unholy trinity 4. Htoo Group – an unlikely
transparency trailblazer?
An associate of Lo Hsing-Han told Global Witness
that Steven Law originally obtained Yadanar Taung Another noteworthy crony business with a hefty
Tann’s Gwi Hka mines through a partnership with stake in jade is the Htoo Group, which recorded
army firm Myanma Economic Holdings Limited pre-tax sales of US$13 million at the 2014
and that this brought the company into conflict Myanmar Gems Emporium.262
with the KIA/KIO, which has historically regarded
Gwi Hka as its sphere of influence.260 The dispute Htoo Group’s colourful boss, Tay Za, has been
was resolved via a meeting at the KIA/KIO HQ in trying to shake the label of Myanmar’s ‘number
Laiza between Steven Law and KIA General N’ban one crony businessman’ for years.263 Subject to
La. Steven Law offered to involve the KIA/KIO in international financial sanctions since 2004,
Asiaworld’s jade mining ventures and N’ban La he has been described by the United States
accepted, although whether he did so on behalf of government as “an arms dealer and financial
the KIA/KIO or in a personal capacity is unclear.261 henchman of Burma’s repressive junta”, whose
The General did not respond to a request for Htoo Group ”carries out key projects on behalf
comment on this point. of the Burmese junta, including the purchase of
military equipment and aircraft for the Burmese
Either way the outcome appears to have been a military”.264 Links to military and ruling party
three way partnership between a Myanmar army figures have also been cited as a basis for sanctions,
company, a ‘crony’ firm likely founded on drug including his business association with Aung Thet
money and a leader of the KIA/KIO. This illustrates Mann, son of Thura Shwe Mann, the third highest
well how battlefield enemies have found common ranking figure in the former military government
cause in exploiting Kachin State’s jade. and current Speaker of Parliament.265
KIA/KIO General N’ban La became involved in Yadanar Taung ‘Number one crony’ Tay Za built his business empire through
Tann’s Gwi Hka jade mines as part of a deal made with Asiaworld connections with the military junta, and has been subject to US
boss Steven Law. The nature of this agreement and the question of sanctions for years. He is said to have a personal penchant for jade
whether General N’ban La took a stake in these ventures, either in and, until last year, he chaired the Myanmar Gems and Jewellery
a personal capacity or on behalf of the KIA/KIO, remains unclear. Entrepreneurs Association.
Global Witness’ efforts to obtain a comment from the General on
this point have so far been unsuccessful.

62 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Despite attempts by Tay Za’s circle to refute Now, however, the Htoo Group has pledged to
the claims against him and the Htoo Group, the support reforms of the jade sector. To demonstrate
sanctions remain in place.266 He is now said to be its commitment to the EITI, the conglomerate
suffering financially, and there are rumours that provided Global Witness with details of its jade
he has been selling off jade business ventures to joint ventures, mine locations and 2014 sales and
“Wa companies” (Wa involvement in jade is the tax payments, broken down by project.271 This
subject of the next section).267 Company represen- sets an important precedent for other players in
tatives have denied that there have been any such the country’s most opaque sector and shows that
sell-offs, however.268 concerns that leading jade companies cannot or
will not comply with EITI standards are misplaced.
Htoo Group’s jade mining activities have attracted
a good deal of criticism from others in the
business and people living in Hpakant. The
Ceasefire Groups
company is accused of tipping off MEHL when
other concessionaires discovered valuable jade
deposits; thereby paving the way for the army
company to muscle in on the mines.269 Locals Following decades of armed opposition from
also describe how Htoo relocated the village of Myanmar’s many ethnic minority groups, the
Tawng Kaw so that it could slice in half the hill it military government negotiated a series of
was perched on and access the jade within. The ceasefires from 1989 to 1995. The so-called
remodelled hill is now known locally as “Htoo ‘ceasefire groups’ were rewarded with access to
Kabar” (Htoo Cliff).270 Global Witness has put valuable business opportunities including jade
these allegations to Htoo Group but has not concessions in Kachin State.272 Two of these are
received a response. particularly significant to efforts to reform the
jade business: the United Wa State Army / United
Wa State Party and the Pa-O National Organisation.
1. United Wa State Army / United Wa
State Party
The United Wa State Army (UWSA) / United Wa
State Party (UWSP) have been heavyweights in
the jade business since the early 1990s. Evidence
gathered by Global Witness suggests that the
ultimate boss of the Wa-associated jade companies
that now operate in Hpakant is drug lord Wei Hsueh
Kang, the former financial affairs chief for the
UWSA/UWSP. The US government has offered a
reward of up to US$2 million for information leading
to his arrest or conviction and imposed sanctions
on him, his associates and his companies.
The Htoo Group has provided to Global Witness detailed information
on its jade mining operations in Hpakant, including the sales
revenues generated and taxes paid in relation to each of its mines.
This shows that it is perfectly possible for jade companies to
disclose data, broken down by project, on their mining and trading
activities. If Tay Za can do it, why not the other major players in the
business? CREDIT: Htoo Group

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 63
Both Wei Hsueh Kang and the
UWSA/UWSP are subject to US
sanctions and indictments for
drugs trafficking. Today, Wei
Hsueh Kang is behind a web of
powerful jade companies which
operate in Hpakant using
the Wa name.
One outstanding question is whether Wei Hsueh
Kang and his associates currently control these
jade ventures on behalf of the UWSA/UWSP, in an
entirely personal capacity, or somewhere in
between. This is hard to gauge, although long-time
observers of Wa State suggest that its leaders
still work hand in glove with Wei Hsueh Kang,
even though they now seek to downplay his role
within the UWSA/UWSP leadership.273
What is clear, however, is that this group of jade
companies exploits the fact that it is believed to
represent the UWSA/UWSP, whom neither the
Tatmadaw nor the KIA/KIO wish to antagonise.274
Using the Wa name, it has mastered the mafia-style
landscape of Hpakant to become exceptionally
powerful.
Representing the Wa ethnic group, the UWSA/UWSP administers
Myanmar’s largest ceasefire zone, located in Shan State on the
The following is a summary of a longer China border. The UWSA/UWSP has been granted an unparalleled
level of autonomy, and it is the largest and most well-equipped
background paper on the Wa-associated jade
non-state armed group in Myanmar, with an estimated 20,000-
companies that will be published separately to 30,000 regular troops and up to 50,000 reserves.
this report.

64 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Narcotics kingpin Wei Hsueh Kang’s jade business network
LEADER
Pao Yu Hsiang
EX-HEAD OF
(Subject to US
FINANCIAL sanctions)
UNITED WA STATE AFFAIRS KACHIN INDEPENDENCE
ARMY/PARTY ARMY/ORGANISATION
(Ethnic armed group) (Ethnic armed group)
FATHER-IN-LAW
BENEFICIAL OWNER Wei Hsueh Kang BUSINESS
PARTNERS
(Subject to US
sanctions)
BENEFICIAL OWNER COLLECTS TAXES
FROM JADE
DIRECT RELATIVES Aik Haw COMPANIES FOR
REPRESENTATIVE HONG PANG DIRECTOR (Subject to US
COMPANIES sanctions)
DIRECTOR
(Subject to US DIRECTOR
RUN COMPANIES sanctions)
REPRESENTATIVE
REGISTERED TO
SAME ADDRESS
MANAGING DIRECTOR FORMER MANAGER
INVITED TO VISIT FACILITIES IN:
AUSTRALIA / GERMANY /
Khin Maung SPAIN / UK / FRANCE
Sai Philip Yee Yan Aung Win Li Myint Myint Zaw Bo Khant
(Subject to US
sanctions)
FOUNDING
DIRECTOR
MANAGING DIRECTOR MANAGES DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR JADE MINING
OPERATIONS
MANAGING
MYANMAR
DIRECTOR MSP
TAKAUNG
MINING
GEMS
AYEYAR
YADANAR
DIRECTOR
GEMS
SHARE COMMON
YAR ZA
DIRECTOR
HTAR NE
REPRESENTATIVE
GEMS
APHO TAN SAN
CHAIN HMI
(registered as
REPRESENTATIVE
Value Standard
General Trading)
THAW TAR
WIN GEMS DIRECTOR
BROTHER MYANMAR
WORKS FOR DEALERSHIP
NOTE: Directorships reflect listings in the DICA company
These five companies collectively control over 50 jade mines.
registry as of November 2015. More complete DICA
Their combined pre-tax sales across the 2013 and 2014 Myanmar Gems records from October 2014 indicate that directors are
also shareholders. According to one Hong Pang group
Emporiums topped US$100 million, according to official figures. This does
director, the Hong Pang companies are no longer active.
not include the much larger amounts they are alleged to have smuggled. They are still listed, however.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 65
Perpetual evolution – the An expanding share of the pie
shape-shifting Wa-associated jade
businesses
“We can take all the jade from
Hpakant within three years.”
“If one company name is destroyed,
Myanmar Takaung company representative286
the people behind it stay the same and
they use another name.”
Jade businessman on the Wa-associated jade companies275
Originally the main UWSA/UWSP-associated
company mining jade in Hpakant was Wei Hsueh
Kang’s Hong Pang.276 But as US government
pressure increased on Wei’s businesses, the
Hong Pang brand was shelved.277 What happened
next? Global Witness has reviewed a range of
documents and gathered testimony from a wide
range of well-informed sources that lead us to the
following conclusions:278
• Hong Pang’s jade business has effectively
Dump trucks from the Myanmar Takaung company in Gwi Hka,
morphed into jade mining operations in Hpakant
Hpakant, tipping waste which jade hand pickers then search
run by the company Myanmar Takaung in through. Myanmar Takaung and its associated companies have
become very powerful players in Hpakant; controlling at least 50
conjunction with four other licensed mining
mines. CREDIT: Minzayar
firms: Ayeyar Yadanar, Yar Za Htar Ne,
Thaw Tar Win and Apho Tan San Chain Hmi
(registered under its English name Value
Standard). Listed or former Hong Pang An official document seen by Global Witness details
directors and managers are instrumental 49 mines controlled by Myanmar Takaung and its
in the running of all five companies.279 associated companies.287 But we have gathered
• These five companies carry out jade mining additional information that suggests this tally is
too low, as the UWSA/UWSP-associated
operations together and can be regarded as
companies have moved into other mines, including
part of the same business group.280
at least one licensed to Tay Za’s Htoo Group.288
• Wei Hsueh Kang is a beneficial owner of the
jade mining ventures of the five companies
Alongside the expansion of their portfolio of jade
and exercises ultimate control over them.281
mines, the top dog status of the UWSA/UWSP-
• This group of five companies may represent
associated companies is visibly reflected in their
the business interests of the UWSA/UWSP.282
fleet of 40 giant Komatsu PC2000 backhoe diggers,
which cost US$80 million and matches that of
Below Wei Hsueh Kang, the key players overseeing
Ever Winner.289 These machines are described
this group of jade mining companies are Aik Haw,
by one jade businessman as looking “like a two
the son-in-law of UWSA/UWSP supremo Pao Yu
storey building”.290
Hsiang, Zaw Bo Khant, a director or representative
of all five firms, and Li Myint.283 All three previously While the UWSA/UWSP-associated companies
worked with the Hong Pang Group.284 Aik Haw and have spent heavily on machinery for digging jade,
Li Myint are subject to US sanctions for narcotics- they do not appear to have invested in systems to
related business activities.285 dispose of the tailings safely. Twice in March 2015,

66 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
a 500 foot high tailings dump built up by Yar Za local residents and media suggest that dozens
Htar Ne and the Aung Hein Min company in the Sik may have been killed.291
Mu / Seng Tawng area collapsed. Accounts from
Myanmar Takaung and its associated
companies operate not only in their
own mines, but also in those licensed
to other companies. Here Myanmar
Takaung works the Kaday (#3) mine
licensed to Tay Za’s Htoo Group.
“A gangster group doing black Apart from the scale of their assets and operations,
business”292 the main distinguishing feature of the Wa-associated
companies is the way in which they are able to invoke
the UWSA/UWSP name and its unique strategic
“The Wa use money, power and position to bend other companies to their will. The
weapons; they even kill people. Local tactics they are reported to use are straight out of a
people cannot confront them.” gangster’s playbook and include the following:
Jade businessman293
• Offering companies the protection of the
UWSA/UWSP name in exchange for payment
or a share of production.294 This protection
option has reportedly been taken up not only
by smaller firms but also big names such as
Myanmar Naing Group, the firm controlled by
sons of Than Shwe, and Yadanar Taung Tan,
run by Asiaworld tycoon Steven Law.295
• Coercing other businesses into coming under
the UWSA/UWSP umbrella by blocking road
access to their mines.296
• Making threats: these include less than subtle
references to how UWSA/UWSP company
representatives have had people killed in the
past.297
UWSA/UWSP supremo Pao Yu Hsiang. The Wa-associated jade
• Using law suits to harass other businesses
mining companies in Hpakant operate like a protection racket;
using the UWSA/UWSP name to bully other firms into making whom they accuse of stealing their jade.298
business deals with them.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 67
2. Ruby Dragon Business meets politics
The UWSA/UWSP is the biggest but not the only For the PNO, business and politics are closely
ceasefire group in Hpakant. After the Pa-O linked. The Ruby Dragon Group has stated to
National Organisation (PNO) laid down arms in
Global Witness that “funds from [its] jade, jewellery
1991, the government awarded valuable gemstone
and mining businesses [go] to the PNO and
mining concessions to the Pa-O company group
development of the [Pa-O] region”.303
Ruby Dragon.299
The Ruby Dragon Chairman, Nay Win Tun, was
Over the years, the Ruby Dragon Group has
formerly responsible for “special economic affairs”
become a prominent player in the jade and ruby
for the Pa-O, and in the 2010 parliamentary elections
industries. In 2000, it became one of the first
he ran unopposed as a PNO candidate and secured
companies to enter into a joint venture with the
Ministry of Mines to mine jade, and it subsequently a seat in the Amyotha Hluttaw (the upper house of
hit the headlines when it discovered the world’s parliament).304
biggest ever jade boulder – a whopping 3,000 tonne
stone which it gifted to Myanmar’s military junta.300 Global Witness’ research indicates that the
Chairman of the Pa-O Self-Administered Zone,
The group has diversified from its gemstone Saw Lwin, and another PNO parliamentary
origins to a range of other sectors; from wine representative, Khin Thein Pe, also hold
making and agriculture to manufacturing and
directorships of various companies, in some
hospitality, with some of its companies now
cases alongside Nay Win Tun.305
featuring in Myanmar’s top taxpayer lists.301
During his parliamentary term, the Ruby Dragon
Its gemstone interests continue to provide a
chairman has taken a leading role in the ongoing
significant revenue stream, however. Ruby Dragon
revisions to the laws which govern Myanmar’s jade
Group companies and joint ventures recorded
industry. As chair of the Amyotha Hluttaw committee
pre-tax jade sales in excess of US$58 million at
on natural resources and environmental
the 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium and US$46
million the previous year.302 conservation, he has had a front row seat in
closed door negotiations over new mining and
gemstone laws.306
Effectively, this means that a prominent industry
player is involved in setting the rules which will
regulate his own business. This typifies a wider
problem of conflicts of interest affecting Myanmar’s
legislature, which undermines the chances of it
producing laws and regulations which truly serve
the public interest.
The chairman of the Ruby Dragon Group, Nay Win Tun, has also
headed the parliamentary committee responsible for revising
Myanmar’s mining and gemstone laws. Addressing conflicts of
interest of this kind is critical to building public trust in the
legislature and ensuring that new laws and regulations best serve
the interests of ordinary people in Myanmar.

68 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
What would you do with the world’s biggest block of jade?
In December 2000, the Ruby Dragon Group made the record-breaking discovery of a 3,000 tonne block of
jade from its operations in the famed Nam Maw area of Hpakant.307
The find was described by the company as being “of the best imperial jade quality. A world record indeed, in
size and value”.308
On 26 May 2002, the jade block was donated to the government in a formal ceremony involving Lieutenant-
General Khin Nyunt, then head of the Military Intelligence Service and the primary architect of the
ceasefires with ethnic armed groups such as the PNO and the UWSA/UWSP.309
The speech Khin Nyunt made at the handover ceremony shows just how Kachin State’s valuable jade was
used to further the Myanmar government’s political agenda:
“The Union of Myanmar is a
nation at which other nations are
casting a covetous eye, as it is
world-famous for its inexhaustible
precious gems. When the
Tatmadaw started to assume
the duty of the State, it has, with
the spirit of solidarity and unity,
invited in all the national
organisations which were
launching armed opposition
against the state; as a result, 17
nationalities’ armed groups have
returned to the legal fold… The
Government has… seen to it that
they are able to do business.
Arrangements have been made
to enable the national
organisations to do business
such as gems mining. As the
national organisations have
worked hard with the aim of
serving the interests of the
people and the state, their business
has become successful.”310

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 69
International companies Xie Family’s links to MEHL go back to 1995 when
it became a primary jade mining contractor to the
military firm.316 A MEHL annual report shows that
by 2002 Xie Family operations accounted for 98%
The “new” Myanmar is open for business. For
of jade stocks from the army company’s mines.317
multinational powerhouses with few fresh markets
The same document records Xie Family making
left to tap, the opportunities are obvious. But for
“supervision charges” to the Tatmadaw Northern
household names with reputations to defend,
Command in Kachin State.318 An MEHL annual
there are major risks too. The dangers posed by
report covering the year 2007-2008 lists Xie
the secrecy and abuse that currently pervades
Family in a table of “MEHL-Owned Businesses”.319
Myanmar’s jade sector are highlighted by the
recent experiences of two of the US’ biggest
names – Coca-Cola and Caterpillar. Their unwitting
links to some of the most notorious of the companies
featured in this report underline the need for
greater openness regarding company ownership
in Myanmar and beyond.
1. The real thing – MEHL and Coke’s
shared partner
When the Coca-Cola Company established itself
in Myanmar in 2013, it spent “a seven figure”
sum hiring prominent firms including Kroll and
PWC to carry out due diligence on its prospective
partner and director, Daw Shwe Cynn, the head
of a Myanmar soft drinks company called Pinya
Manufacturing.311
This stone marker on the bridge on the road to Hpakant states
that the bridge was built by MEHL and Xie Family. The business
This was the right thing to do. Yet seemingly relationship between the two companies dates back to 1995.
no one picked up that Daw Shwe Cynn is a 20%
shareholder in Xie Family, a prominent jade
mining company and long-time contractor for MEHL’s jade division, Myanmar Imperial Jade,
Myanma Economic Holdings Limited.312 She is told Global Witness that it no longer worked with
also a director and the majority shareholder in Xie Family and Daw Shwe Cynn and U Chaow said
one of Myanmar’s biggest jade trading firms, Gold that Xie Family has not had a mining contract
Uni, which she runs with her husband U Chaow. with MEHL since 2012.320 However, it appears
Gold Uni company is listed on government maps that the two companies have continued trading
as holding the jade mine Gwi Hka (#27) just south together: Myanmar Gems Emporium figures for
of Hpakant.313 According to Chinese media reports 2014 describe the two companies jointly selling
and industry sources, the firm was investigated by jade worth over five million euros.321 Aside from
the Chinese authorities as part of a crackdown on its dealings with MEHL, official maps show that
jade smuggling in 2010-11.314 Xie Family holds a joint venture mine with Myanmar
Gems Enterprise in Hpakant.322 According to U Chaow
Involvement in jade should be a big red flag, the company holds several other mining licences.323
given the corruption, military involvement and
environmental and human rights abuses, and the In a letter to Global Witness, Daw Shwe Cynn said
fact that Myanmar jade and key players in the that her role in Xie Family is as a non-executive
business, including MEHL, are still subject to US director and minority shareholder and that she is
sanctions.315 not involved in the day to day running of the company.

70 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
She said she acquired the 20% stake in the firm on Responsible Investment in Burma.”326
in 2009 as security against a substantial debt that Meanwhile, at Global Witness’ request, Coca-Cola
Xie Family still owes to U Chaow. This relates to facilitated a dialogue between Global Witness and
a loan that U Chaow extended to Xie Family for Daw Shwe Cynn. This enabled Global Witness to
purchase of equipment in 1995 – the period when put a proposal directly to Xie Family that it make
it was first incorporated and began partnering early disclosures of information about its jade
mining activities in line with EITI, including details
with MEHL. As regards Gold Uni, Daw Shwe Cynn
of the volumes of jade it produces, its payments to
wrote that the company has a licence to mine in
the government and any arrangements with state-
the Maw La Kin area in a joint venture with the
owned enterprises including army companies. Daw
Ministry of Mines. She denies that Gold Uni has
Shwe Cynn’s 20% stake in Xie Family and her
been investigated by the Chinese authorities.
husband’s role as a key company creditor would
appear to give her a strong platform for demanding
Where does this leave Coca-Cola? Trade in jade
the company start being more transparent.327 She
is subject to US sanctions and so is MEHL. But
stressed in her letter, however, that “my minority
joint ventures with jade company owners or MEHL
shareholding in Xie Family is atypical and does not
contractors are not. No laws were broken; still,
allow me any influence over [its] business”.
Coca-Cola’s indirect connection with Xie Family
and MEHL puts the onus on the multinational to
After months of written correspondence and two
use its considerable influence with its partner to
face to face meetings with Daw Shwe Cynn, there
encourage greater accountability in the murky
is little to suggest that Xie Family is willing to
jade business. edge out of the shadows and play a constructive
role in reforming the jade business. The contrast
Global Witness has been in discussions with between the image of positive global modernity
Coca-Cola for several months about what steps it expounded by Coca-Cola and the sordid, secretive
can take. On the back of these communications, character of the jade sector is as stark as ever.
the company published the names of the directors
and shareholders of its local subsidiary, and In July Coca-Cola commented that “We hope that
disclosed information on the Xie Family connection Global Witness… is willing to play a role to work
as part of the report it submitted under the US with related parties in Myanmar to bring about
Reporting Requirements in June 2015.324 positive and long-lasting change in the country.”328
But how does the company see its own role?
Coca-Cola has been handed the opportunity to
This represented a good start, but the report does
turn a potential public relations disaster into a
not address certain critical issues. It lists the
showcase for its commitment to responsible
shareholders of its subsidiary in Myanmar as
business practices. However its professed efforts
being two companies – Coca-Cola Myanmar
to use its influence to push for better practices
Overseas Holding Pte. Ltd and Pinya Manufacturing
in its partner’s jade business have yielded
– but provides no details on the identities of the
nothing tangible. Is the company that once exhorted
beneficial owners of these firms and what their other
the world to “make it real” hoping the issue will
business interests and connections are. Coca-Cola
simply go away?329
also did not report on the fact that Xie Family has
had a long-standing partnership with MEHL.
Clearly, Coca-Cola’s fingers have been burnt, but
this episode is just a symptom of a much deeper
Global Witness asked Coca-Cola in a letter in
problem. The company’s experiences show why
August this year who are the ultimate beneficial
Global Witness is calling for more robust due
owners of Coca-Cola Myanmar Overseas Holding diligence and public reporting by international
Pte. Ltd and Pinya Manufacturing. Coke did not companies. Likewise, investors should publish
answer this question.325 The company did say, the names and identifying information of the
however, that “The Coca-Cola Company has been individuals who own and control their in-country
transparent about our joint venture and operations ventures, together with information on these
in Myanmar and we continue to go above and beyond people’s other business interests and any political
the Department of State’s Reporting Requirements or military connections.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 71
2. Travels with my CAT, by Zaw Bo
Khant
Global Witness’ investigations into the web of
companies associated with drug lord Wei Hsueh
Kang and the UWSA/UWSP turned up an
unexpected connection in the form of US
machinery giant, Caterpillar Inc.
Zaw Bo Khant is the managing director of Myanmar
Takaung, the pivot for a group of jade mining The United Kingdom334
companies Global Witness believes to be controlled
by Wei Hsueh Kang and which are profiled in the
previous section of this report. He is also the
director and shareholder of Myan Shwe Pyi
Mining, whose associated company Myan Shwe
Pyi Tractors describes itself as “Myanmar’s
premier Caterpillar dealership” and uses the
branding MSP CAT.330 Zaw Bo Khant’s brother is one
of Myan Shwe Pyi’s customer service managers.331
Since 2011, Zaw Bo Khant has been hosted at
Germany335
Caterpillar facilities around the world, including:
France336
Australia332
… And along the way, found time for sightseeing,
champagne on the Eiffel Tower, Rolex shopping
Spain333 and several rounds of golf.337

72 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Caterpillar Inc. has stated to Global Witness that, Kang’s Hong Pang companies is well known and
as far as it is aware, any business courtesies should be grounds enough for a responsible
provided to Zaw Bo Khant during his visits to company to make further enquiries.342
Caterpillar facilities are in line with the company’s
Code of Conduct which prohibits bribes, kickbacks The international firms which make and supply
or any other measure which is unethical or which machinery to mining operations in Hpakant risk
would tarnish Caterpillar’s “reputation for honesty causing serious harm to local people by building
or integrity”.338 In addition, Caterpillar Inc. has relationships with the wrong mining companies.
said that whilst it cannot monitor the use of every
In these circumstances, the onus is on
piece of its equipment around the world, it expects
manufacturers to be completely transparent
customers to use its products in a responsible,
regarding who they are doing business with. They
lawful and productive manner.339
should be proactively seeking information on their
local partners and other associates, rather than
The US giant has further explained that it primarily
simply referencing the US sanctions list as a
sells its products through independent dealers.
tick-box exercise.
In line with its Code of Conduct, it carries out
“robust screening procedures to ensure that its
The US government has recognised the
transactions do not violate relevant export
particular risks facing western companies looking
control laws”.340 It emphasises that neither Zaw
to invest in Myanmar, and US companies are
Bo Khant nor Myanmar Takaung feature on US
therefore required to publish information on their
sanctions lists, and goes on to state that Caterpillar
business activities and their approach to corruption,
Inc.’s due diligence has not demonstrated that
human rights, environmental and other risks.343
companies named by Global Witness are owned or
controlled by “a sanctioned party”.341
These requirements do not currently apply to
companies which operate through, for example,
Caterpillar Inc.’s unwillingness to take the
independent dealerships, but Global Witness
information provided to it by Global Witness more
asked Caterpillar Inc. if it could produce a report
seriously is both disappointing and short-sighted.
in line with the designated standards on a
As explained above, there is strong evidence that
voluntary basis.344 Unfortunately, the company
Wei Hsueh Kang and his associates have used
an array of front companies precisely in order takes the view that as “There is no current obligation
to avoid US sanctions and indictments. As such, for Caterpillar to file such a report… Caterpillar does
there is a good reason why the ‘public faces’ of not intend to file such a report.”345 This suggests
UWSA/UWSP-linked companies will not be on that the US government will need to expand its
current US sanctions lists. Moreover, Zaw Bo reporting requirements if companies like Caterpillar
Khant’s previous role as manager for Wei Hsueh Inc. are to take a more responsible approach.
The big jade players are spending millions
of dollars apiece on huge machines from
international suppliers to carry out large-scale
exploitation. This highlights the globalised
dimension of the jade industry, and raises
questions for machine companies like
Caterpillar Inc. – do they really know who they
are doing business with? CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 73
CHAPTER 3: WHO’S LOSING OUT?
The impact of the jade trade’s This in turn feeds into support for a harder line
expansion and capture by Myanmar’s stance against the Myanmar government in the
context of the armed conflict in Kachin State, an
elites has been devastating for the
issue which is examined in the next chapter.
people of Kachin State, who have
been robbed of their natural
At the same time, many are using peaceful means
inheritance. Within the mining
to call for change. Last year just under 5,000
region of Hpakant itself, it has residents of Hpakant signed a letter to President
created a dystopian wasteland in Thein Sein setting out their concerns over the
which the local population grapples exclusion of local people from the jade business,
and the irresponsible and short-term approach
with environmental and social
to mining taken by licensed companies.346 In
collapse on a daily basis.
November 2014, 2,000 people took to the streets
to protest against the killing of a local miner by
The consequence is a palpable sense of anger an employee of one of the big companies.347 It is
against the big companies which rake in the benefits now up to the government to show that it is willing
at the expense of local people, as well as the Nay to listen, and to start addressing the issues that
Pyi Taw authorities that license them to operate. local people are raising.
A call for change from Kachin State
In October 2014, 4,923 people in the jade mining township of Hpakant signed a letter to President Thein
Sein demanding an end to the abuses by jade mining companies. The letter details devastating
environmental and social impacts caused by company activities:
“As part of jade mining activities in Hpakant, a limited number of capitalists have been granted permits for
blocks, whereas local ethnic groups have been granted no jade blocks. Although certain companies are affiliated
to ethnic groups, such affiliation is in title only and these companies are dominated by foreign nationals.”
“The mining companies are dynamiting the hills and mountains to allow exploration activities prior to the
expiry of their contracts, and they are acting solely for their own benefit in the excavation of valuable jade via
short-term rather than long-term processes. This poses a serious potential health hazard to residents, and
causes a wide range of diseases or fatalities.”
“Companies do not systematically stabilise sites where they have undertaken deep excavations and created
reservoirs. As a result, heavy rains cause reservoirs to burst, and reservoirs are also sometimes destroyed
intentionally, leading to the death of cattle and loss of property. However, the companies never take responsibility
for such incidents.”
“The huge vehicles used by the companies have left the streets congested, and accidents are frequent.”
“Although valuable resources, priceless gems, forests, and gold are all vanishing due to excavations by
companies equipped with machinery, the public does not benefit from these activities. Conversely, people
are suffering as a result of health hazards and are even dying due to the air pollution created by the dynamite
mining of the companies.”
“Issuing grants to these companies to work on blocks will lead to a rapid decline in the state of local residents’
properties as well as the region’s valuable jade, leading to serious repercussions for the next generation.”

74 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
“The tree is in our garden but we are not allowed to eat the fruit”
Jade businessman348
In November 2014 around 2,000 miners and local inhabitants of Hpakant took to the streets to signal their opposition to the way the jade business
is currently managed. CREDIT: KDNG

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 75
Kachin’s stolen inheritance lots of power”.351 Some smaller-scale Kachin
miners have become “workers on their own land”;
but in fact many licensed companies prefer to
employ workers from other states and divisions,
Discuss jade with a Kachin and they invariably
leading many locals to move to other regions or
hark back to the old days, when families could
even overseas to look for work.352
draw on Hpakant’s natural riches to build homes
and make their livelihoods. However, since the
Government regulations restricting transportation
military junta parcelled the jade mines out in
routes and cutting and polishing activities mean
the early 1990s, the industry has gone from a
that the mere possession of valuable jade by
small-scale business in which many local miners
people in Kachin State is, in most cases, a criminal
could participate to one run by government-
act.353 This gives rise to the perception that
approved companies who are often backed up
“the government doesn’t want Kachin people to
by military force.349 In the words of one church
become rich; Kachins are discriminated against
leader, “The native people are voiceless. After when it comes to the jade trade”.354 In June
the ceasefires, companies were brought in by the 2014, following intensive lobbying by local jade
authorities but they showed no respect for local businessmen, a market for jade and amber was
people’s rights”.350 formally opened in Myitkyina.355 While a step in
the right direction, the market is only allowed
The few Kachin companies licensed to mine jade to sell the lowest grade jade, and handling and
compete against bigger players, described by one trade of raw commercial or imperial grade jade in
former jade trader as having “deep pockets and Kachin State remains illegal.
Today, ethnic Kachin are largely left out in the cold whilst jade concessions go to “big companies… controlled by lowlanders, not locals… which
represent the military, cronies and elite groups…” The Kachin who remain in the business are largely relegated to digging through the waste left
by licensed mining companies. CREDIT: Minzayar

76 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
On the massive revenues from jade, the big questions there is no discussion about jade and about sharing
are “where is Kachin’s share?”, and “where is resources. We need transparency and therefore
the money really going?”. One community leader trust between Kachin State and the central
explained that “… now there is no transparency, government.”356
“Fair and unfair – forget about it! As long as this policy of 50 years stands, how
can we talk about fair?”
Kachin businessman357
“Now there is no transparency, there is no discussion about jade and
sharing resources. We need transparency and therefore trust between Kachin
State and the central government.”
Kachin community leader358
A jade miner on his way to a mining site in Hpakant. As one Kachin community leader explained, after the ‘big companies’ arrived, most local people
lost their jobs in the mining business: “Young people cannot make any money from mining, so there is a kind of ‘brain drain’. They go to other
states and divisions or even overseas to find work. So there is a waste not only of natural resources but of human resources too.” CREDIT: Minzayar
These grievances have been compounded by the widespread that with “jade mountains going day
massive upswing in jade extraction by licensed by day” soon “all the jade will be gone”, leaving
companies over the past year. Fears are now nothing for future generations of Kachin State.359

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 77
A truck stuck on the muddy road to Hpakant, waiting to be dragged out by elephants. As a Kachin community leader explained: “Huge amounts
of precious jade have been mined in Hpakant over decades and yet in Kachin State there are insufficient schools and supply of electricity, and the
roads are in very poor condition.” CREDIT: Minzayar
A small-scale miner inspects a stone he has found in a waste dump, whilst large-scale mining operations continue behind him. With licensed
companies bringing in bigger machines than ever before, locals fear that Hpakant, for centuries the world’s most important source of high value
jade, will soon be empty of the stone. CREDIT: Minzayar

78 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
The jade business is a fundamental part of life in
Kachin State. The hero of this Kachin film, entitled
‘Seng Htu Brang and Ja Hnang Shayi’ (in English: ‘The
Jade Mining Boy and the High Class Girl’) is a young
jade miner who risks the perils of police and landslides
to make his living from the famed stone.
Frantic jade extraction has destroyed Hpakant’s
environment, turning its mountains into craters,
polluting its lakes and streams, felling its forests
and – as shown in this picture taken in 2014 – causing
flooding.
The environmental and social in the river was very clean. There were even tigers
living there. That time was the BSPP [Burma Socialist
collapse of Hpakant
Programme Party / Ne Win dictatorship] era. People
did not find it easy to dig jade. Now the rivers become
dry, the forests are felled, the tigers have gone…
The concentration of vast natural wealth and
Now jade mountains disappear within just a few
militarisation in a remote place has condemned
days… Now no more malaria here, because all the
Hpakant to become Myanmar’s answer to the
forests have gone!”361
old Wild West – a place where those with money
and guns have total impunity and display minimal
A former jade miner gave another account of the
respect for the local environment and culture. The
changes wrought by industrial scale mining:
impacts have been catastrophic for the people
who inhabit the area.360 “When I worked in the jade mines, the Uru River was
clean and clear. You could drink the water. Now that
One small-scale miner, an ethnic Shan who moved is no longer possible. The streams that feed the Uru
into the area at a young age, described the changes River now only flow during the rainy season. This is
he had seen to Hpakant’s environment: because the tailings from the jade mines now block
their natural course. In the old days, the KIO
“I came 40 years ago. At that time Hpakant was like a controlled a landscape of mountainous forests, but
jungle, with forest everywhere. Now the environment now there is no forest. Mountains have become
around Hpakant has changed. 40 years ago the water valleys and valleys have become mountains.”362

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 79
Untrammelled jade exploitation has turned and they blame the blasting for “chickens no
Hpakant into a moonscape, with mining bringing longer laying eggs”.368 The wholesale stripping
down “jade mountains”, leaving behind water- of the Hpakant region’s forests is said to have
filled craters and causing widespread flooding made the “environment more dry than before”.369
and pollution.363 In recent months there have Traditional livelihoods of farming and mining have
been a series of fatal accidents resulting from been disrupted by the loss of land, pollution and
the common company practice of dumping huge the takeover of the jade industry by government-
quantities of waste into lakes and streams or in licensed companies.370 A single mother of three
massive mounds which are prone to collapse. One children who has lived in the Maw Sizar area since
28-year-old teacher living in a village near the 1991 described the impact of the operations of
Maw Sizar mine described how a landslide caused Kyaing International, a mining company owned by
his house to fall into a mine. He managed to
the family of former military dictator Than Shwe:
escape, but the school in which he works is very
close to a mining area and so very dangerous for
“Up until around 2005 I had good opportunities to
the children.364
make a living for my family through small-scale jade
trading. When the company arrived, however, I was
In April 2015 the Kaday (#2) mine operated by
told I must leave the house and accept one million
Myat Yamon – a company controlled by former
kyats compensation. I did not wish to accept, but
USDP General Secretary Maung Maung Thein
then backhoe diggers came and destroyed my home.
and profiled in Chapter 2 – was the scene of a
This was the rainy season and my family and I had no
particularly deadly accident. A film of the incident
shelter. Many others were in the same situation. In
shows a torrent of liquid mud cascading over
2012 the company had to suspend its operations and I
the edge of the crater where the company’s staff
had opportunities once again to trade small amounts
were operating, engulfing the machines and their
of jade dug in the company’s concession by artisanal
operators in its path.365
miners. But then in 2014 the suspension was lifted,
the police came and chased the small-scale miners
According to local residents the company claimed
away and the company returned to exploit the area
that 11 people died but the real total was between
once more.”371
30 and 60. They added that the disaster was
caused by Myat Yamon’s dumping of tailings on
There is widespread drug use amongst jade
a bed of liquid mud above the mine. The waste
miners, and the jade boom has brought with it
then shifted and flooded into the crater.366 To the
increased prostitution and gambling.372 In the face
best of Global Witness’ knowledge no judicial
of indifference or complicity on the part of the
measures have been taken to hold the company
authorities, local groups are undertaking their
accountable for the accident.
own efforts to combat the harm the jade industry
is causing. In July 2015, for example, a church-
Landslides are not the only impact of reckless
organised anti-drugs committee instigated the bust
company activities. In March 2015, KDNG
of one of Hpakant’s main dealers. This resulted
recorded just a few of the accidents caused by the
in the seizure of a massive drugs haul and the
vehicles brought into Hpakant by licensed
equivalent of US$3 million in cash, together with
companies. These included: a dump truck hitting
a document setting out around US$500,000 in
people washing at a river crossing and killing
a 22-year-old and a 13-year-old; another dump bribes the dealer had apparently been paying to
truck hitting a small vehicle, causing one of its members of the police, Special Branch and local
passengers to fall out and be run over by the next officials.373
truck in the convoy; and another brake failure
incident, causing a truck to seriously injure a Despite the strength of these voices, their calls
38-year old-woman.367 for a new approach to jade mining which benefits
local people and mitigates harm have so far been
Local people report that companies’ use of ignored. This has direct implications for the conflict
explosives is forcing them to leave their homes which we explore in the next chapter.

80 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Living the jade rush
Tens of thousands of people from across the country have flooded into Kachin State to chase the jade
dream, all hoping to make their fortune with the right jade find.374
One 41-year-old described how he came to Hpakant 20 years ago to make his fortune. Without the
resources to secure a jade licence he has become a yemase collector – a hand-picker who combs
through the company waste for jade.375 During the 2012-2014 mining suspension, when licensed
companies withdrew from Hpakant, he was able to move into the concession areas, working on the
cliffs in Maw Sizar “even though it’s risky, because there is good jade”.
He has made two lucky finds of jade pieces worth five million kyat (around US$5,000) and six million
kyat (around US$6,000), but like many others has become caught in “a cycle of jade and drugs” and
unable to save money. Six months ago, he went home to take the monkhood and gave up drugs, but fell
back in feeling tired and depressed. He still holds out hope that he will one day become a “laoban [jade
boss] billionaire”, promising that if he finds a 10 million kyat piece of jade he will return home for good.
This experience is typical of the ordinary miner in Hpakant. Without legal authorisation to mine, they
find themselves at constant risk of arrest and have to flee or pay off police. For those found trespassing
on company property the consequences may be even more serious. In October 2014, a yemase collector
called Gum Ja Aung was separated from his two friends whilst searching for jade. The friends later
found his dismembered body on the compound of the Shining Star mining concessionaire, where he had
been killed by a company machinery operator.376 He left behind a pregnant 22-year-old wife and their
one-year-old daughter.377
“We feel that we have no security for our lives here. The companies came back
here recently. The man was killed with a backhoe digger. Hpakant will soon
disappear without any benefit to the local people if they use such big machinery
to mine. They are useless for the area. Every company is connected with an
army general. The Chinese are also behind them. Indonesia spends 70 percent of
the profits from resources extracted in Aceh in the region. What are the benefits
for Kachin State from resource extraction? That’s why we staged the protest.”
Local clergyman, Hpakant378

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 81
As one old jade hand explained, “if you have capital to invest, you will be happy, but ordinary jade miners are like rubbish – they only get soil”. Most
of those who go to the jade mines become ‘yemase’ collectors who “just find stones in the debris left by big companies”.379 CREDIT: Minzayar
A group of jade miners who have migrated from other regions of Myanmar to find their fortune in Hpakant inspect a stone they found during the
day. CREDIT: Minzayar

82 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
At night, yemase-collectors with torches search for raw jade stones in a pile of waste dumped by licensed companies in the Maw Sizar area of
Hpakant. CREDIT: Minzayar
Yemase-collectors search through waste dumped by licensed company trucks in Gwi Hka, to the south of Hpakant Town. CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 83
Teams of small-scale miners use pneumatic drills to work jade plots in Hpakant in July 2014, during the mining suspension. Since the ban has
been lifted and the licensed companies have returned to Hpakant, these ‘unofficial’ small-scale miners have been largely excluded from the major
jade mining sites. CREDIT: Minzayar

84 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
A group of freelance miners hold a piece of jade they have just dug in a mining company concession area near Lone Khin, Hpakant Township, in
July 2014, during the period that the licensed companies’ operations were suspended by the government. CREDIT: Minzayar
Small-scale miners typically operate without government licences. Here a group of miners are interrogated by the police, their machines are
confiscated and their laoban (boss) is required to go to the police station the next day. The miners claim that they have been targeted because they
have not yet bribed the police, whereas another mining team next to them, who have already paid up, are left completely undisturbed. CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 85
Locals protest the death of a yemase-collector, whose dismembered body was found on the compound of the Shining Star mining company. He
had been killed by a company machinery operator. CREDIT: KDNG
A heroin seller prepares a shot of the drug which he sells at 2,000 kyat – which happens to equate to the lowest price of a small piece of jade.
Artisanal miners typically take up to five of such shots of heroin a day. CREDIT: Minzayar

86 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
CHAPTER 4: JADE AND ARMED CONFLICT
“Why did the ethnic groups rise against the government? It is because they don’t
enjoy equality, autonomy and rights. We must give them to them. To do so, we
need to consider power as well as wealth sharing”
Minister to the President’s Office responsible for the peace process Aung Min380
The war in Kachin State that re-ignited in June The conflict in Kachin State has a range of causes,
2011 after a 17 year ceasefire has left thousands many of them linked to the aggressive centralisation
dead and around 100,000 civilians displaced.381 policies of successive governments in Myanmar and
Both sides have been accused of abuses. For its the growth of Kachin nationalism in response.386
part, the Kachin Independence Army / Kachin Jade is a significant factor, however. As described
Independence Organisation (KIA/KIO) has faced in the previous section, the perception amongst
allegations of recruitment of children and use of Kachins that their jade is being stolen from them
landmines.382 The charge sheet against the by military families, companies and cronies is
Tatmadaw is a good deal longer however, and a powerful driver of nationalist sentiment. The
includes extrajudicial killings, physical and relationship between jade and conflict matters for
psychological torture and forced labour.383 Some at least three other reasons:
commentators have concluded that the Tatmadaw
is deliberately targeting women in Kachin State • The army families and companies that control
for rape and other kinds of sexual violence.384 In many of the jade mines would lose out in the
the course of doing research on the jade business, event of an equitable peace deal. They have
Global Witness has also heard accounts of the financial motivation, and possibly the
Tatmadaw troops using civilians as human shields political reach, to keep the conflict going until
during fighting at Awng Ba Le, north of Hpakant, central government control over Hpakant can
in early 2015.385 be assured.
• The Tatmadaw officers in Kachin State are
making personal fortunes through extortion
What’s it got to do with jade?
of the jade business, and so have a reason to
justify their deployment and keep the money
flowing.
“Currently the development process
• Jade is the main source of income for the KIA/
is a top-down one handled by the Nay
KIO. This makes the battle for control of jade
Pyi Taw government and companies.
revenues a strategic priority for both sides in
The local state governments and local
the conflict.
people have no right to take part in
it. This kind of development program
It is unlikely that a peace agreement that does not
brings more harm than benefit to local
meaningfully address the question of who benefits
people and creates conflict.”
from Kachin State’s jade will be a lasting one.
KDNG / Kachin State Natural Resources Development Policy
Discussion Paper

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 87
The backstory The 1994-2011 ceasefire period saw a scramble
for Kachin State’s natural resources – timber as
well as jade – which made some KIA/KIO leaders
and Tatmadaw officers very rich.391 But for most
The KIA/KIO first established itself in Hpakant
Kachins, the ceasefire brought deforestation,
during the 1960s and jade became the group’s
land grabs, Buddhist Burmese migration and an
main source of funding for over two decades.387
increasingly pervasive Tatmadaw.392
In the early 1990s, following ceasefire deals with
other armed groups, the Tatmadaw was able to
Starting in 2009, the government issued increasingly
concentrate its fire on the KIA/KIO and progressively
insistent demands that the KIA/KIO and other
took full control of the jade mines.388 This was
ceasefire groups become part of ‘Border Guard
almost certainly a pivotal factor in the KIA/KIO’s
Forces’ under the Myanmar Army.393 This broke
decision to sign a ceasefire with the government
promises to defer discussions about the KIA/KIO
in 1994.389
giving up its arms until after a new government
was in place, and set in motion a chain of events
The Myanmar government proceeded to allocate
that culminated in the conflict re-igniting in June
jade mining concessions to Tatmadaw families,
2011.394
friends and conglomerates, as well as ceasefire
groups such as the United Wa State Army / Party.390
As the KIA has been pushed further away from Hpakant, the buildings it previously used have been abandoned. This is a golf club in the San Hkar
area previously used by KIA officers. CREDIT: Minzayar

88 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Tatmadaw and KIA positions
KIA-held area until capture by
around Hpakant 2012-2015
Tatmadaw in January 2015
KIA-held area until capture by
There is a widespread perception that
Tatmadaw in January 2015
Hpakant’s jade mines are not under
full government control and this is why
reforming the business and making
KIA Battalion 6 base until capture by
it more transparent will have to wait.
Tatmadaw in January 2013
However, as indicated in this map, the
government is, in fact, in full control of
the main jade mining areas. Although
the KIA/KIO retains considerable
KIA Battalion 6 base until capture by
influence in the area and has succeeded
Tatmadaw in January 2013
in taxing the companies, this does not
impair the government’s allocation of
licences, its own taxation of the
concessionaires or its ability to disclose KIA Battalion 6 base until capture by
data on these and other issues to the Tatmadaw in November 2012
general public.
KEY
Tatmadaw base &
major jade mines
Tactical Command HQ
small scale jade mines
Tatmadaw posts
villages
KIA Battalion 6 positions
overrun by Tatmadaw roads
rivers
0 5 km

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 89
Everything to lose – the licensed The Tatmadaw’s main priority in Hpakant is milking
money from the jade business and this imperative
jade mining companies
frequently trumps its designated function of
fighting the KIA. The impacts weigh most heavily
“They want to get as much jade as on small-scale miners and traders although the
possible – ceasefire or no ceasefire. larger operators also have to pay off the army to
This is their plan.” facilitate their mining and trafficking of jade.
Jade businessman395
Military officers work through a network of brokers,
informers and plain clothes police to extort
The major jade mining companies, profiled earlier money from small scale miners at a rate of 20%
in this report, will be the biggest losers in any of the value of each stone found.401 The Tatmadaw
loosening of the government’s territorial control also makes lots of money through the provision of
over Hpakant or the introduction of a system that
security to companies.402 According to one mining
gives more benefits to the population of Kachin
firm this involves the licence-holders making
State. Some of the families standing behind the big
one-off lump sum payments to the Tactical
jade mining companies are very powerful, notably
Commander – the commanding officer in Hpakant
those of former Senior General Than Shwe, Minister
– of 5-10 million kyat (US$5,000-US$10,000) and
Ohn Myint and former USDP General Secretary
then providing stipends to the soldiers or police
Maung Maung Thein.396 Military company MEHL
billeted to their compounds.403
meanwhile, is an investment vehicle for retired
military officers associated with the State Peace
and Development Council military junta.397 Many
other companies are believed to have connections
with powerful military figures.398
A number of sources claim that a group of the
biggest jade mining companies approached the
government in late 2011 or early 2012 requesting
the Tatmadaw launch an offensive to dislodge KIA
positions around the mining areas.399 In the second
half of 2012 the Tatmadaw did launch a major offensive
against the KIA in Hpakant which, as the map featured
in this chapter shows, mostly achieved the outcome
the companies are said to have been looking for.
A Tatmadaw soldier walks through a jade mining site in Lone Khin
A mafia in the mines – the as the police and military forces come to arrest illegal jade miners
and the miners’ families stand and shout in the background. The
Tatmadaw and jade Tatmadaw systematically extorts from illegal miners and demands a
payment of 20% of the value of each stone that they find; generating
a substantial off-budget revenue stream. CREDIT: Minzayar
“There are no rules here: battalion
commanders, small officers and
Another key source of income for the Tatmadaw is
others all want to benefit from each
bribes from companies and carriers who smuggle
find of good jade. If we don’t pay them
jade into China. Large companies and more
enough, then their intermediaries
established jade carriers must cultivate relations
come and demand more money.”
with the Northern Commander – the most senior
Jade businessman400 officer in Kachin State – as well as other military
personnel, the heads of the police and other agencies,

90 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
and pay them off systematically.404 The main payments from small-scale miners and to maintain
checkpoints on the roads out of Hpakant during communications, thereby reducing the scope
2014 and 2015 are illustrated in the map for misunderstandings that might lead to armed
on the following page.405 Global Witness has confrontation.414 During a stand-off between the
interviewed a range of specialist jade carriers, Tatmadaw and KIA in October 2014, the Tactical
who describe how the checkpoints work: Commander in Hpakant sent his KIA counterpart
a message – via jade brokers – that he did not
• The most powerful and best-connected want to launch an attack, but that he was forced to
companies pass straight through the checkpoints follow orders from Nay Pyi Taw.415
because their trucks are guarded by soldiers
or accompanied by an officer – such as the As with war economies the world over, genuine
Northern Commander’s principal staff officer.406 peace and outright war are the main enemies of
• The medium-sized jade carriers send a car the military entrepreneur in Kachin State. Far
in advance to pay off each checkpoint.407 The preferable are the grey areas in between that
agents give the checkpoint officers the number
justify the deployment of the troops needed to
plate of the jade-carrying vehicle behind so
intimidate and extort but do not demand much
they do not stop it by mistake.408
actual fighting. Peace-makers, both within the
• Small-scale carriers who lack connections
government and outside it, must recognise and
and money try to hide their jade. If they are
confront these incentives and behaviour patterns
caught, they have to pay bribes which are
if they are going to find a way of persuading the
often far in excess of the value of the stone
Tatmadaw to support a substantive peace
they are carrying.409 If they do not pay they
agreement.
face prosecution and potentially a jail term of
several years.410
The KIA/KIO’s main artery
Close observers of the situation in Hpakant claim
that the Tatmadaw and the KIA/KIO actively collude
to sustain their mutual interest in the jade trade.
“The Burmese military government
One observed that the Tatmadaw turn a blind
said that the main artery of the KIA/
eye to the KIA/KIO’s jade transportation routes:
KIO is the Hpakant region. That is why
“they know which ones they are, but they don’t say
that main artery had to be destroyed.
anything.”411 Another described how the Tatmadaw
They do not fight physically with us,
and KIA maintain close contact in Hpakant to
they do it behind our backs”
agree on how much tax each will receive from
KIA/KIO official, 2002.416
significant jade finds.412
The KIA/KIO made Hpakant a key strategic target
“Fighting is fighting, but business when conflict resumed in June 2011. The group’s
is business. Sometimes the representatives told Global Witness in a letter
relationships are very good!”413 that their aim was “to resume control and
KIA/KIO intelligence officer management of the jade business”.417 In practice
this involved deploying KIA troops in and around
Hpakant, as a basis for taxing the jade mine
The Tatmadaw Tactical Commander and KIA concessionaires, taxing small scale miners and
Battalion 6 use the same jade brokers both to levy trading jade.418

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 91
YEK
senim
edaj
tnakapH
sdaor
aiv
etuor
edaj
srevir
aiv
etuor
edaj
shtap
aiv
etuor
edaj
syawliar
aiv
etuor
edaj
stniopkcehc
seicnega
.vog
denibmoc
stniopkcehc
wadamtaT
stniopkcehc
ecilop
&
wadamtaT
stniopkcehc
ecilop
tniopkcehc
AIK srevir
MK
05
0
seiradnuob
noisivid
&
etats
Jade-carrying routes
- Kachin State

92 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Elephants which transport food supplies between the KIA forward positions and its main base pass a KIA checkpoint north of the major jade
mines in July 2014. When the government-KIA/KIO ceasefire broke down in 2011, the KIA/KIO made Hpakant a key strategic target, deploying
troops in and around the area to tax licensed jade companies and small scale miners and to take a direct role itself in the jade trade. By the start
of 2013 all the KIA posts in the immediate vicinity of the big jade mines had been overrun by the Tatmadaw, however. CREDIT: Minzayar
From a KIA/KIO perspective the government had
breached the ceasefire and this meant that any
“If mega development projects are
agreement to stay out of the mining areas and not
started before political resolution,
tax the companies was null and void. Officials
there will be more conflict between
at the KIA/KIO’s Laiza HQ wrote to the main
the government and ethnic armed
licence-holders demanding taxes and, according
groups and more conflict between the
to one source close to the KIA/KIO, many of the
government and local communities.
bigger concessionaires each paid over between
Therefore there must be a
US$100,000 and US$500,000.419 In January 2012 moratorium on all new projects.”
alone the KIA/KIO collected over US$20 million
KDNG / Kachin State Natural Resources Development Policy
from the companies.420 Senior ministers were Discussion Paper
incensed and the KIA/KIO was surprised by its
success.421 Shortly afterwards Nay Pyi Taw, in
an apparent attempt to stop the KIA/KIO making After the mining suspension was lifted in September
money from jade, suspended mining with effect 2014, the KIA/KIO began taxing the companies
from May 2012. once more.422 Its taxation system is based on

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 93
the government’s own records, which it secretly
bought from a Ministry of Mines official.423 The
US$500 spent on a flash drive full of government
data has enabled the KIA/KIO to extract millions
of dollars from the concessionaires.424
According to the KIA/KIO’s written response to
Global Witness, its Department of Commerce “is
responsible for taxation of jade mining concessions
and taxation on the sale of jade which varies depending
on its value ranging from 10-20% of the value and up
to one third of the profits. The companies are taxed KIA/KIO receipt for tax paid on a piece of jade. Both armies levy
payments from small-scale miners, but whilst the Tatmadaw
on the number of miners working, the type of
demands are generally regarded as straightforward corruption,
machinery used and the fuel used to run the machinery. the KIA/KIO charges are perceived by many Kachins as a legitimate
form of taxation. CREDIT: Minzayar
Each person entering the jade mining area is required
to pay an entrance fee.”425
While the KIA/KIO’s taxation of the companies
appears systematic on paper, its representatives
told Global Witness that in practice the amounts
the companies pay are negotiated.426 Furthermore,
sources familiar with the KIA/KIO’s revenue
generation activities say that taxes are collected
from the companies by a broker – Aik Haw – who
is the son-in-law of United Wa State Army / United
Wa State Party leader Pao Yu Hsiang and is a
business associate of drugs kingpin Wei Hsueh
Kang.427 The KIA/KIO denies that it works with
Aik Haw or any other middleman.428 However, the
perception that much of the KIA/KIO jade taxation
is lost to corruption is widespread within Kachin
State.429
Like the Tatmadaw, the KIA/KIO also taxes small
scale miners, with a standard levy on small jade
finds of 10% of value.430 While the more exacting
20% Tatmadaw fee is widely recognised as corrupt
and illegal, the KIA/KIO’s is perceived by many
Kachins as a legitimate taxation system, albeit
a basic one, and the payer receives a receipt.431
KIA Deputy Chief of Staff Gun Maw is seen as the face of a younger
The receipt is also a permit to transport the jade and more reform-minded generation of KIA/KIO leaders. But
questions remain about how much the KIA/KIO old guard is willing
to the border with China without paying any more to open up about how it manages its jade taxation system and what
it does with the money. CREDIT: David Mathieson
duties.432

94 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
The KIA/KIO actively trades and exports jade the KIA/KIO carrying the jade out to China via
itself, using a network of paths running north its Laiza HQ and then selling it can take up to a
from Hpakant.433 In some cases its jade taxation year.435
teams offer traders a choice between paying the
value tax and exporting their stones themselves Prior to the conflict the KIA/KIO had a company
or doing a deal with the KIA/KIO. Such deals either registered in Yunnan Province called Yingchin
consist of selling the jade outright to the KIA/KIO, which was specifically dedicated to trading jade.436
or going into partnership with them on the It was wound up in 2012 following the resumption
transportation and sale of the stones and receiving of the conflict and it is not clear whether the KIA/
a share of the final sale price.434 This process of KIO has set up another firm to take its place.437
A KIA checkpoint north of the main Hpakant jade mines and around 1000 metres from the nearest Tatmadaw post, July 2014. This checkpoint was
overrun in a Tatmadaw offensive just a few months later, as the government sought to weaken the KIA/KIO’s capacity to tax the licensed jade mining
companies. CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 95
CONCLUSION
Myanmar’s jade industry may well be the biggest natural resource heist in
modern history. The sums of money involved are almost incomprehensibly
high and the level of accountability is at rock bottom. As long as the ghosts
of the military junta are allowed to dominate a business worth equivalent to
almost half the country’s GDP, it is difficult to envisage an end to the conflict
in Kachin State. Lessons from other nations afflicted by the resource curse,
as well as Myanmar’s own history, suggest that the threats to the country’s
wider political and economic stability are also very real.
A view of Hpakant’s ‘treasure land’. Root and branch reform is essential if Myanmar’s jade riches are to benefit local people. CREDIT: Minzayar
The cast of characters we have unmasked are as a whole. This is a question we have not even
not only the least deserving but also amongst begun to answer, but it is clear that immense
the most dangerous recipients of Hpakant’s jade amounts of money from jade are accumulating on
wealth one could imagine. More worrying still is the Chinese side of the border as well as in Myanmar.
that we have only scratched the surface. What if
the widespread assumption that all major jade The challenge is daunting. It is easy to see why even
companies are controlled by military families is reformers in Nay Pyi Taw have been reluctant to
true? Then there is the issue of who in China is face up to what is really going on. Many governments
benefitting, and what influence they may exert in countries emerging from conflict or tyranny
behind the scenes in Kachin State and in Myanmar try to defer the question of who will benefit from

96 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
natural resources. This calculation is sometimes Whoever leads Myanmar’s next government has
underpinned by vague notions of a grand bargain: the opportunity to start transforming jade from
the idea that former despots, rebels and military the curse it currently is to the blessing it should
commanders can be sated with a super-size slice be for people in Kachin State and all over Myanmar.
of the nation’s resources and will agree not to be Indeed, they will need to do this if they are to
‘spoilers’. take the country further along the path to peace,
democracy and prosperity. Moreover, with the
It rarely works out that way. Looted resource plunder accelerating, they will have to act fast.
wealth does not just rob local people of the
opportunities for a better life that they deserve. The new government’s initial priorities should be
It empowers opponents of peace and democracy urgent and concerted action to build transparency
who have little popular support but may attempt a and accountability in the jade business and to
comeback if handed the keys to a war chest. bring the issue of resource management into the
peace process. To be successful, it will require
Myanmar has a good chance of avoiding this fate. considerable support from its international
For all its limitations, the Thein Sein government partners. That is why the recommendations at the
has crossed some very significant thresholds, in front of this report are addressed as much to foreign
terms of both natural resource governance and governments and international organisations as to
peace negotiations, which it will be hard, although the winners of November’s historic election.
not impossible, for a successor regime to step
back from. Myanmar also, for now at least, has
the world’s attention.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 97
Glossary and Acronyms
A joint venture arrangement between state-owned enterprise Myanmar Gems Enterprise and a jade mining company,
a kyo thu
whereby the former takes 40% of post-tax sales revenues and the latter takes 60%.
A company’s ultimate beneficial owners are the individuals (or single individual) who ultimately own or control the
company, either directly or indirectly. This means the persons who control the actions of the company and/or who
beneficial owner (or
ultimately receive the profits. Significantly, a beneficial owner must be a real, live individual and not another company or
‘ultimate beneficial
trust. For companies with complicated ownership structures, involving many different corporate vehicles and, in some
owner’)
cases, private agreements over ownership and/or control, the beneficial owners are the individuals who are right at the
top of the chain.
Myanmar’s Directorate of Investment and Company Administration. DICA is a directorate of the Ministry of Planning
DICA
which administers Myanmar’s company registry.
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. EITI is a global standard for transparency in the oil, gas and mining industries
EITI
which is currently being implemented in Myanmar.
An area within Myanmar’s northern Kachin State where the world’s most valuable deposits of high value jadeite (jade)
Hpakant
are located.
Tom Lantos Block Burmese JADE (Junta’s Anti-Democratic Efforts) Act of 2008. This is a United States law that prohibits
JADE Act
imports of jade and rubies from Myanmar.
KIA Kachin Independence Army. A non-state armed group representing the Kachin ethnic group.
KIO Kachin Independence Organisation. The political wing of the Kachin Independence Army.
kyat A unit of Myanmar’s currency.
The Chinese word for boss, used in Hpakant to mean jade mining boss. This term is often used to refer to someone who
laoban
manages a group of small-scale (often illegal) miners.
MEC Myanmar Economic Corporation. A Myanmar army company.
Myanma Economic Holdings Limited. A Myanmar army company. Unlike MEC, MEHL writes its name in English without
MEHL
an ‘r’ at the end of Myanma.
Myanmar Gems Enterprise. A state-owned enterprise which also acts as a sub-division of the Ministry of Mines responsible
MGE
for managing the mining and marketing of jade and other gemstones.
Myanmar Gems and Jewellery Entrepreneurs Association. The major industry body that represents jade businesses in
MGJEA
Myanmar.
Nay Pyi Taw (or
The capital of Myanmar.
Naypyidaw)
National Registration Card number (or Citizenship Scrutiny Card number). This is a national identification number
NRC (or CSC) number
allocated to each citizen of Myanmar.
Office of Foreign Assets Control. An office of the United States’ Department of the Treasury which administers and
OFAC
enforces American economic and trade sanctions.
PNO Pa-O National Organisation. The political wing of the non-state armed group which represents the Pa-O ethnic group.
SPDC State Peace and Development Council. The name used by the ruling military junta in Myanmar between 1997 and 2011.
State Law and Order Restoration Council. The name used by the ruling military junta in Myanmar between 1988 and
SLORC
1997.
Tatmadaw Myanmar’s armed forces, administered by the Ministry of Defence.
A ‘jade-picker’ who searches through the waste dumped by mining companies to find pieces of jade which they have
yemase-collector
missed.
The Union Solidarity and Development Party. The ruling party of Myanmar, and the successor to the Union Solidarity
USDP and Development Association (USDA), a mass organisation set up by the military junta’s State Peace and Development
Council (now dissolved).
UWSA United Wa State Army. A non-state armed group which represents the Wa ethnic group.
UWSP United Wa State Party. The political wing of the United Wa State Army.

98 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Appendix 1: how much is Myanmar’s jade business really worth?
The following estimates are just that – estimates. Chinese import records cannot be relied upon
Our intention, in publishing some specific figures, as a comprehensive data source on Myanmar
based on the incomplete data available, is not so jade imports.
much to have the last word on the value of Myanmar’s • The sales data that is available from the annual
jade business as to trigger a debate and encourage emporiums is distorted by price manipulations,
the full disclosure of the information the public and the systematic smuggling of high-grade
needs to make more definitive assessments on an jade means that these stones are under-
ongoing basis. represented at emporium sales.
• An additional shortcoming in sales data is
This paper sets out the basis for the estimates of that buyers frequently do not complete the
jade production value described in the main body purchase of jade lots on which they win bids
of the report and covers the following: at the Myanmar Gems Emporium. According
to state-owned enterprise and regulatory
• Key considerations body Myanmar Gems Enterprise (MGE), only
• Data sources 54.84% of sales at the 2013 Emporium were
• Estimates of the value of Myanmar’s jade completed, and industry sources estimate
production based on Emporium data that the completion rate went down to 30.38%
• Using Chinese trade data to make an alternative at the 2014 Emporium. This means that records
estimate of sales made at the emporiums do not reflect
• Adjusting the 2014 jade production estimate the volume and value of cleared sales.
based on Emporium data to account for jade • 2014 is an atypical year in that, in addition to
sold through local jade fairs official sales of jade through a major emporium
• Estimating the value of total production, geared towards the international market (51st
including jade mined but not officially recorded Myanmar Gems Emporium), two official jade
• Estimating the Myanmar government’s take of fairs (or local emporiums) were also held.
the country’s most lucrative natural resource Only very low-grade jade was available for
sale at these fairs and buyers were domestic
rather than international.
(A) Key considerations
• There are huge variations in the value of jade
depending on quality, which itself depends on
Any assessment of Myanmar’s jade industry a range of factors including colour,
is limited by the absence of detailed and translucence, texture and consumer trends.
disaggregated public data on production and As explained in Chapter 1, the price of a single
sales. Calculations are further complicated by a kilogram (kg) at the 2014 Emporium ranged
range of factors including the following: from less than US$2 to over US$2.89 million.
Valuations cannot therefore simply be based
• As explained in Chapter 1, there are very high on volume, but also require data on the
rates of jade smuggling, particularly in relation grades of the jade.
to the most valuable stones. This means that
sales at the Myanmar Gems Emporium, the
(B) Data sources
main official route for jade traders to sell to
the international market, in fact represent
only part of Myanmar’s jade trade. Global Witness has obtained a range of unpublished
• Jade smuggling is aimed at evading taxation data sets which provide a basis for more reliable
not only in Myanmar but also in China, the estimates of Myanmar’s jade industry than have
main market for the gemstone. Consequently, been made previously.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 99
These include: evidence of systematic evasion of official controls
and it is clear that, in reality, the official production
• A detailed breakdown of sales at the 51st data is a very significant underestimate. We
Myanmar Gems Emporium, the only official examine the question of what total production
jade sale for the international market in 2014 (recorded and unrecorded) might amount to below
(the ‘2014 Emporium’). This contains information in section (G).
on weight, sale, price, owner and buyer for
(2) Proportion of production of each of the three
over 6,000 jade lots. It is separated into two
main grades of jade (imperial, commercial and
categories:
utility): The relative distribution of jade production
– Jade lots sold by tender. This is the process
by grade is the variable with the least information
used to sell lower value lots at the Emporium.
– simply put, no one knows how much of the
Tender data contains jade grade information,
different grades of jade are produced in Myanmar
with most lots marked as one of three
every year. However, knowing a rough percentage
categories: imperial (high-grade); commercial
for different grades is essential because of the
(medium-grade); or utility (low-grade).
significant variation in price. We have calculated
– Jade lots sold by auction. Jade grades are
grade proportions based on data from the 2014
not marked in the data set we have, but the
Myanmar Gems Emporium. However, systematic
auction is the process used to sell the
smuggling of higher value jade means that the
higher value stones.
Emporium under-represents the proportion of
• Breakdowns of jade lots – and their
more valuable jade produced. We have therefore
categorisation by grade – offered for sale at
also used an additional estimate of the relative
the 52nd Myanmar Gems Emporium in 2015.
proportions of the three main jade grades as
• Breakdowns of the top-selling companies and
shares of production that is based on industry
their sales at the 50th Myanmar Gems Emporium
estimates gathered by Harvard University and
in 2013. Proximity Designs and used in their 2013 study on
• Data on jade sold at every Emporium held the jade business.439
between 2005 and 2014, broken down by
overall aggregate revenues and weights.438 (3) Values of the three main grades of jade (imperial,
• Data on aggregate sales at jade ‘fairs’ aimed commercial and utility): To calculate prices for
at the domestic market in 2014. different categories of jade, we have taken
• Data on official revenues from mine site taxes averages of the prices per kilogram of imperial,
in 2013. commercial and utility jade sold at the 2014
Emporium. As described below, under (F), we
This data is not comprehensive and it is subject to have adjusted these averages to accommodate
various biases, but it is more detailed than any figures from the October 2014 local jade fair;
information used in previous public assessments although we recognise that this data is not
of the jade industry. In conjunction with public representative of the business as whole, given the
data, it allows us to make new valuations of irregularity of such local fairs, their orientation to
the domestic market and their focus on the lowest
Myanmar’s jade industry.
quality utility jade. Drawing on the jade fair price
data is likely to pull our average price estimates
(C) Variables down below the actual level.
Our calculations of total sector size of Myanmar’s
(D) Estimates of the value of
jade industry are based on three variables:
Myanmar’s jade production based
on Emporium data
(1) Total volume of jade produced: This is comprised
of the officially recorded jade production and we
use government statistics as the basis of our Table 1 below sets out the distribution of jade
calculations of the sector’s value. However, across grades and average prices per grade we
multiple jade industry sources have provided have calculated based on the 2014 Emporium data.

100 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Table 1: Prices and distribution of jade across grades at 2014 Emporium440
Percentage of
Total weight Percentage of Total value of sold Average price
Jade grade total Emporium
(in kg) total volume jade (US$ millions) (per kg)
revenue
Imperial 53,537 1.49% US$1,044 US$19,491.97 29.58%
Commercial 407,137 11.33% US$901 US$2,213.89 25.55%
Utility 3,131,870 87.18% US$1,583 US$505.52 44.87%
One notable feature is that the proportion of the former underrepresenting higher grade jade.
imperial grade jade is very low – less than 1.5%. To compensate for the distortion in the Emporium
As explained above however, multiple industry data caused by the widespread smuggling of higher
sources have suggested that the higher value jade quality jade, we have used industry estimates
(particularly high-grade imperial) is typically of how jade production is split across the three
smuggled, and it is the lower quality, higher grades gathered by Harvard University/Proximity
weight stones which are sent to the Emporium. Designs and used in their 2013 study on jade. The
This means that the proportional split between split indicated by their research is set out at Table
the three grades at the 2014 Emporium is not 2, and indicates higher proportions of high and
representative of the jade that was mined, with medium-grade jade.
Table 2: Distribution of jade production across grades based on interviews with industry sources by Harvard/ Proximity
Estimated share of total jade production
High-grade jade (imperial) 5%
Medium-grade jade (commercial) 35%
Low-grade jade (utility) 60%
In Table 3, we then apply this percentage split information makes more accurate estimations
between the three grades, together with our average impossible.
price per grade, to Myanmar’s official annual jade
production figures to estimate the overall value Combining these estimated prices with official
of all jade mined and officially recorded each year production figures, and the estimated split
over the past ten years. between imperial, commercial and utility jade,
we are able to calculate the total value of jade
Since line-by-line sales data is not available for production for each of the past ten years in
all emporiums held in Myanmar over the past columns E and F. While we include the calculations
decade, we extrapolate from the 2014 Emporium in column E using the split between jade grades
figures to estimate the value of jade production for indicated by the 2014 Emporium, these estimates
previous years. We assume that the proportional are likely to be significant under-valuations,
share of each jade grade remains constant. We as evidenced both by testimony from industry
also assume that jade prices for each grade sources and by Chinese customs data (examined
change by the same percentages over time. So, in more detail in the next section). In column F we
if for example the three grades were priced at have set out the estimates generated when we
US$1, US$4 and US$10 one year, the next year use the split between grades identified by
they might be US$2, US$8 and US$20. This Harvard/Proximity, which we consider more
method is imperfect, of course, but the lack of reliable.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 101
Table 3: Estimated valuations of official jade output from 2005 to 2014
A B C D E F
Total sector size Total sector size
Volume of jade sold Total value of sales Total annual
(2014 Emporium split (Harvard/ Proximity
Year at emporium (in at emporium (in production (in
between grades) (in split between grades)
thousand kg)441 US$ millions)442 thousand kg)443
US$ millions) (in US$ millions)
2005 3,377 US$165 20,005 US$974 US$2,039
2006 11,073 US$366 20,458 US$677 US$1,415
2007 15,043 US$693 20,266 US$933 US$1,951
2008 12,830 US$794 32,924 US$2,039 US$4,262
2009 12,938 US$926 25,795 US$1,847 US$3,860
2010 16,416 US$2,890 46,810 US$8,241 US$17,225
2011 16,313 US$5,277 43,185 US$13,969 US$29,199
2012 4,221 US$677 19,080 US$3,060 US$6,396
2013 3,927 US$3,192 15,062 US$12,242 US$25,589
2014 3,865 US$3,580 16,684 US$15,453 US$34,248
Totals US$59,435 US$126,184
(E) Using Chinese trade data to China’s gems imports from Myanmar are classified
make an alternative estimate by codes according to a method for recording
traded goods called the Harmonised System (HS).
These codes, while relatively precise, can lump
The production value estimates from Table 3 /
together more than one type of stone into a single
column F above are backed up by an alternative
figure. The US$12.3 billion figure includes three
valuation based on price estimates drawn from
HS codes: HS710310 (precious or semi-precious
trade data from China, the pre-eminent consumer
stones unworked), HS710399 (worked precious
market for Myanmar’s jade.
or semi-precious stones) and HS711620 (articles
of precious or semi-precious stones). These HS
Chinese customs data for 2014 indicates that
codes do not cover any diamonds or gold, and also
precious and semi-precious stone imports from
exclude worked rubies, emeralds or sapphires,
Myanmar were worth US$12.3 billion. An analysis
which fall under HS710391 (rubies, emeralds
of the codes used to classify these imports shows
and sapphires worked but not set). None of these
that the vast majority of this US$12.3 billion was
gems could be included in the US$12.3 billion figure.
jade. The US$12.3 billion worth of gemstone
imports account for less than a third of the weight
Of the gemstones covered by these three HS
of Myanmar’s official jade production for 2014,
codes, imports that entered China under the code
and therefore is a significant underestimate of
HS710399 were by far the most valuable – worth
the value of Myanmar’s jade production by itself.
US$11.1 billion of the US$12.3 billion. While
However, combining this import data with
disaggregated data on the values of the sub-
Myanmar’s production data allows us to make
categories of gemstones that make up this
another estimate of the total value of Myanmar’s
US$11.1 billion is not available, there is more
jade production.
detailed data available when it comes to their
weight. This shows that the vast majority – 99.2%
Before going any further, how do we know
– of these precious and semi-precious stones
that this US$12.3 billion worth of precious and
were either HS71039910 (the sub-code for jadeite
semi-precious stones was almost all jade?
– the higher value type of jade) or HS71039940 (the
sub-code for nephrite – the lower value type of jade).

102 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Other unspecified precious stones accounted for legitimate export at the border have no reason to
0.7% of the weight. As noted, these would not have overestimate the value, as this will incur a higher
included diamonds or rubies, which are listed tax bill. Conversely, they will have an incentive to
under other HS codes, but could have included under-declare.
quartz. Tourmaline and crystal accounted for 0.1%
of the weight of HS710399 imports, though this
These results are truly striking: two
amounted to only 37 kg.
different methodologies both showing
estimates of well over US$30 billion
What about the other two HS codes, which make
for Myanmar’s jade sector in 2014.
up the remaining US$1.2 billion not covered by
HS710399? HS710310 (precious or semi-precious
stones unworked) could include precious or Finally, it is worth returning to the question of
semi-precious stones other than jade. However, how this Chinese import data sits with Myanmar
while the average price of US$127.69 per kg for government production data. The total weight of
gemstones in this category is a plausible value for the $12.3 billion worth of jade imports was 5.402
pieces of very low grade jade, it would certainly million kg, which equates to less than a third of
not apply to some of Myanmar’s other famous Myanmar’s official jade production in 2014. This
gem exports such as rubies and sapphires. strongly supports numerous accounts from
industry insiders who say 50-80% of jade is
HS711620 (articles of precious/semi-precious smuggled straight over the border into China.444
stones) is harder to define or eliminate from,
though given the fact that HS710399 (worked
(F) Adjusting the 2014 jade production
precious or semi-precious stones) was almost
estimate based on Emporium data
all jade, it seems likely that ‘articles of precious
to account for jade sold through
or semi-precious stones’ would also consist of
local jade fairs
almost all jade-based products. We therefore
believe it is reasonable to assume that almost
all of the semi-precious and precious stones Our estimates above rely on data from the 2014
accounted for in the $12.3 billion figure are jade. Emporium about prices of jade, and use these to
estimate the size of production for other years. As
If we use the Chinese US$12.3 billion gemstone already noted however, 2014 is an atypical year
imports figure to calculate an average price of because two local fairs were also held, selling low
jade imports, this yields a figure of US$2,276.93 quality jade to Myanmar rather than international
per kg of jade. We can apply this average price buyers. Prior to 2014, only one local fair had been
to the total volume of Myanmar’s official jade held in nine years.
production of 16.684 million kg in 2014 to make an
alternative valuation of the sector. This calculation To recap: in contrast to the main emporium, these
puts the value of 2014 jade production at local fairs are irregular events focused on selling
US$37.988 billion in 2014. low-grade utility grade jade (in effect the lowest
of the low) to the domestic market. The data they
It is worth noting that this average price, and yield on prices is not therefore representative of
therefore the estimate derived from it, is more a business which is overwhelmingly focused on
likely to be too low than too high. Firstly, as trade with the international (Chinese) market.
already described, a high proportion of the more
valuable jade is smuggled and evades Chinese While we believe that using this local fair data
customs, thus pulling down the average price of introduces a significant risk of under-estimating
Myanmar jade as indicated by the Chinese data. jade prices, we have decided to incorporate it
Secondly, traders who do present their jade for rather than simply putting it to one side. As such,

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 103
we have recalculated the average price for utility Using the proportions of jade across the three
grade jade in 2014 to take into account the sales grades employed by Harvard/Proximity, the
data we have on the local fair held in October.445 estimate of production value in 2014 becomes
Since these fairs have typically not been held in US$30.859 billion. While the Harvard/Proximity
the years running up to 2014, we do not undertake split between grades is drawn from qualitative
a similar recalculation for the 2005-2013 period. data and is an estimate only, we believe it is more
accurate than the one offered by the 2014
If we combine the local fair data we have with Emporium data, given how the latter is
the 2014 Emporium data, this yields a reduced distorted by the smuggling of more valuable jade.
average price of US$166.95 per kg for utility grade
jade. In Table 4, we use this revised figure to In our conclusions, we have chosen to highlight
recalculate our two valuations of 2014 jade this more conservative estimate of US$30.859
production. billion over the US$34.248 billion figure set out
above in Table 3 (column F).
Using the proportions of imperial, commercial
and utility jade drawn from 2014 Emporium sales We consider US$30.859 billion to be the most
figures, the valuation falls to US$5.643 billion. reliable estimate of 2014 jade production available,
However, this estimate is clearly flawed since it since it is based on the most realistic split
falls well below the value of jade imports from between grades of jade and the most conservative
Myanmar recorded by Chinese customs in 2014. price data. Moreover, it still comes in considerably
As set out in Section D above, Chinese trade data lower than the estimate yielded by the alternative
on imports from Myanmar records a figure of methodology based on Chinese import data
US$12.3 billion in 2014 for the category of gemstone which is outlined under (E) above.
that includes – and overwhelmingly comprises –
jade. This can effectively be treated as a minimum If we combine this revised estimate with the
estimate of Myanmar’s jade sector in that year, estimated valuations of official production in
moreover one that does not consider the 2005-2013 using the Harvard/Proximity split
cross-border smuggling which is evidently between grades (set out in Table 3 column F), the
rampant. overall estimate for the value of jade production
over the past decade becomes US$122.8 billion.
Table 4: Re-calculation of official production value using sales data from October 2014 local fair446
A B C D E F
Total sector size Total sector size
Volume of jade Total value of sales Total annual
(2014 Emporium split (Harvard/ Proximity
Year sold at emporium at emporium (in production (in
between grades split) split between grades)
(in thousand kg)447 US$ millions)448 thousand kg)
(in US$ millions) (in US$ millions)
2014
(excluding
3.865 US$3.580 16.684 US$15.453 US$34.248
data from
local fair)
2014
(including
10.943 US$3.701 16.684 US$5.643 US$30.859
data from
local fair)

104 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
(G) Estimating the value of total site if we combine official data with information
production including jade mined from industry sources. According to industry
but not officially recorded sources, 50-80% of the total jade produced is
smuggled into China. This could mean that as
Neither our 2014 Emporium price data-based little as 20% of the jade which reaches China
production estimates nor the alternative valuation enters the country legally.
based on Chinese import figures take account of
jade which is never officially recorded. According to official trade data, just over 72
million kg of jade has been imported to China
Interviews with industry sources in both China from Myanmar over the past decade. If we use the
and Myanmar indicate that whilst some jade upper estimate of 80% of jade being smuggled as
production may be officially recorded before it is a basis for calculations, this would mean that jade
smuggled, a significant proportion is also kept off recorded in Chinese import figures represents a
Myanmar’s books altogether (for example, by fifth of the total volume which goes to China from
paying off officials to under-record production).449 Myanmar. Total production of jade between 2005
At the same time, industry sources indicate that and 2014 may therefore be up to 361 million kg.
the smuggling is aimed not only at evading taxes
in Myanmar but also those in China, and so We can apply the Harvard/Proximity figures on
smugglers are endeavouring to dodge Chinese the split between imperial, commercial and utility
border controls as much as Myanmar ones. This jade and the average prices extrapolated from
means that Chinese trade data under-records the 2014 Emporium data to calculate a value. As
jade imports from Myanmar. Table 5 shows, on this basis we estimate that
Myanmar’s total production over the past decade
It is, however, possible to estimate the value of –including ‘unofficial’ / unrecorded jade – could
smuggled jade that is not recorded at the mine be worth as much as US$170.764 billion.
Table 5: Estimates of maximum possible sector value
A B C D E F
Maximum estimate Maximum estimated
Official
of total sector Estimated size of sector value (based
Official jade production in
size (using upper unofficially produced on volume in C and
Year imports to China450 Myanmar in
industry estimate jade over 2005-2014 Harvard/Proximity
(in million kg) 2005-2014
of 80% unrecorded (in million kg) split between grades)
(in million kg)
jade) (in million kg) (in US$ billion)
2005-2014 72.389 361.943 260.269 101.674 US$170.764
Additional notes on calculations were which grades for the 2015 Emporium.
This shows that of the 334 lots offered for
auction in 2015, only two were imperial grade
• The price we calculated for imperial grade
jade. It is likely that a similarly small number
jade is based on the average price of all
of lots at the 2014 auction sales were imperial
auction (as opposed to tender) sales at the
grade, and this in turn suggests that the
2014 Emporium. This is because higher value
imperial grade jade price we have estimated
jade was sold by auction, but we do not have
for the 2014 Emporium has been dragged
data specifying which lots were imperial
down by lower grade lots that were sold by
grade. We do have full data on which stones
auction that year. This is backed up by one

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 105
data point we have for a piece of imperial Our calculation is set out in Table 5, and it is based
grade jade sold at the 2014 Emporium by Htoo on the following information and assumptions /
Group company. This jade was sold for 40 estimates:
times the price we have estimated for imperial
jade based on the 2014 Emporium data set. • Data available on licence fees is extremely
As such, our calculation of the average price
limited. According to Myanmar Gems Enter-
of imperial jade may be a substantial
prise (MGE), 937 companies had licences to
underestimate, and consequently the true
mine jade in the 2014-2015 Fiscal Year. One
value of production may be much higher than
industry estimate suggests that only 30% of
our figures indicate.
these companies are likely to operate privately
(that is, outside a kyo thu arrangements) and
• As detailed in Chapter 1, price manipulation
therefore be liable for licence payments.
is widespread at government emporiums.
Licence-holders can hold up to 50 permits of
Industry sources indicate that such manipu-
1 acre each, and if we assume that 30% of 937
lation is primarily about companies selling
hold an average of 25 acres, this gives a total
to themselves (via proxies or agents) at an
of 7027.5 acres held under private licence.
artificially low price as means of reducing the
taxes that they have to pay. There are also This estimated acreage aligns with information
accounts of price inflation either for money from other industry sources who have
laundering purposes or to keep certain estimated licensed mining acreage at between
categories of jade off the market; however, 12,000 and 35,000 acres, which would yield
interviewees suggest that artificially depressing a median of 23,500 acres.451 If we use the
prices is far more prevalent. Again, we do not same estimate of 30% of mines under private
have sufficient information to take account licences, we get a figure of 7,050 acres.
of these issues in our calculations, and are
unable to determine the overall effect of these
• There are huge variations in the possible prices
manipulations on jade prices.
for licences, but we have taken an average
price of over 16.5 million kyat for a three year
• Sales at the July 2015 Myanmar Gems
licence based on the average of various data
Emporium fell sharply due, it is thought, to
points provided by MGE.452 Using these figures
the imposition of a deposit system to
we have calculated a rough average for licence
discourage buyers from placing winning bids
revenues on an annual basis, which we estimate
and then failing to make payment. In the
at US$5,615.34 per year.
absence of a detailed sales breakdown, it is
not possible for us to analyse which grades of
• MGE has provided details of mine site tax
jade have been impacted by the fall, or what
revenues for the Financial Year 2013-2014 and
the implications are. For the purposes of this
we have assumed that this figure remains
calculation, we assume that the introduction of
a deposit impacted all grades of jade equally constant in the Financial Year 2014-2015.
and does not therefore affect the pricing
distribution. We have reviewed data on companies which
operate wholly or partially in the jade sector, and
which appear in Myanmar’s top commercial and
(H) Estimating the Myanmar income tax payers lists to calculate approximate
government’s take of the country’s tax payments derived from jade. We have calculated
most lucrative natural resource their payments based on the tax payment bands
that they are listed in, using a median figure for
We have also made a rough estimate of the likely each band.
government take from Myanmar’s jade sector in 2014.

106 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
Table 6: Estimate of Myanmar government jade revenues in 2014
Item Estimated value (in US$ millions)
Estimated licence fees (assuming average licence price of US$5,615.34 per year
US$39.46
and 7,027.5 private jade licences)
Mine site tax revenues (based on FY2013-2014 figure) US$6.12
Revenues from 10% sales tax at 2014 Emporium (assuming 30.38% completion rate) US$108.77
MGE 40% share of completed a kyo thu sales (estimated) (assuming 30.38%
US$138.93
completion rate)453
MEHL and MEC revenues from jade ventures (including joint ventures in which we
US$38.74
assume they take a 40% share) (assuming 30.38% completion rate)
Estimated commercial tax payments by jade businesses (based on FY2013-2014 data) US$39.86
Estimated income tax payments by jade businesses (based on FY2013-2014) US$2.11
Total US$373.99
Note: Emporium sales are subject to an additional 1% levy which goes to the Central Committee of Myanmar Gems Emporium. This
has not been included as it is not strictly part of the Myanmar state’s take of jade revenues. According to Myanmar Gems & Jewellery
Entrepreneurs Association, money raised through this levy goes to a fund which is spent on emporium organisation, administration and
building maintenance costs as well as “works leading to development of the gem market” and ”CSR”.
One striking feature of the calculation above is the the emporium (and therefore its value should be
low level of revenue from the 20% mine site tax, essentially unchanged between these locations).
particularly when compared to the US$108 million
in revenue generated by the 10% sales tax at the We do not make any adjustment for transportation
2014 Emporium. charges between the mine and emporium as
reliable estimates are not available. However,
We have calculated in Table 7 an estimate of transportation charges are unlikely to account
what the mine site tax could generate if it was for anywhere near the US$369.56/kg discrepancy
implemented properly. For the purpose of this between the tax that should have been collected
calculation, we assume that jade undergoes no and the tax actually paid.
significant value add between the mine site and
Table 7: Discrepancy between actual and estimated potential mine site tax revenue
Total theoretical tax collections
Average 2014 Emporium 20% ‘Mine Site’
Share of production in FY2014 based on 2014 official
Sale Price (per kg) Tax (per kg)
production (US$ millions)
Utility 60% US$166.95 US$33.39 US$334.25
Commercial 35% US$2,214 US$442.78 US$2,585.56
Imperial 5% US$19,492 US$3,898.39 US$3,252.04
Total value of properly assessed 20% mine site tax (not including any adjustment for
US$6,171.85
transportation charges or value added between mine site and emporium)
Mine site tax paid US$6.12
Estimated MGE mine site tax revenue loss in 2014 US$6165.73

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 107
Appendix 2: Kachin Development Networking Group: ‘Solutions to
Current Destructive Natural Resource Development Process and
Related Conflicts’
The following is taken from Chapters V and VI of right will the political situation be resolved,
the Kachin Development Networking Group (KDNG) investors will be convinced to invest, and people
‘Kachin State Natural Resources Development Policy can improve the quality of their lives. The ownership
Discussion Paper’ on the constitutional changes rights stated in the current 2008 constitution in
required as a basis for equitable and sustainable Chapter 1, Clause 37 (a) must be changed in a
natural resource management in Kachin State. federal constitution from: The Union is the ultimate
The full paper, published in June 2015, is available owner of all lands and all natural resources above
at http://www.kdng.org/press-release/455-press- and below the ground, above and beneath the
statement-of-kdng-kachin-state-natural-resources- water and in the atmosphere in the Union to The
development-policy-discussion-paper.html. people of Kachin State are the ultimate owners
of all lands and all natural resources above and
below the ground, above and beneath the water
Solutions to Current Destructive and in the atmosphere in the State.
Natural Resource Development
Process and Related Conflicts In addition, ownership rights for Kachin State
should also include the following principles:
1. Immediate Constitutional Reform
(a) One must have the right to own one’s land
A constitution should clearly establish legal rights and property, (and/or) ethnic groups must
to the nation’s natural resources in order to have the right to common ownership.
provide the foundation for proper natural- (b) If the property belongs to the people by
resources management and development, and customary law, all the local residents must
social peace. The 2008 constitution must be be allowed to use it.
re-written or replaced to address the issue of (c) Local people must be granted permission
natural resources, specifically in the areas of to extract the natural resources on their own
ownership, management, and revenue collection. land.
At the same time, the army must be brought
under the control of a civilian government and the B) Ensure Kachin State has full management,
state governments must be completely directly legislative, and enforcement powers over natural
elected. Specific measures to integrate natural resource development, including licensing
resources powers into constitutional reform
should include: Currently the development process is a top-down
one handled by the Naypyidaw government and
A) Ensure Kachin State has full ownership of all business companies. The local state governments
natural resources and this is written into the and local people have no right to take part in it.
federal and state constitutions This kind of development program brings more
harm than benefit to local people and creates
If there are no proper and clear ownership rights conflict. A “bottom to up” development process
to the natural resources in the constitution, engages local people in decision making and
problems will arise between the central, state, provides benefits to the local citizens. If people
and local governments and it can lead to renewed are not engaged in the process of managing their
conflicts. Only when there is a clear ownership own natural resources, more political problems

108 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
will emerge and peace in the country may be affected. government should not be dependent on the
Therefore, the Kachin State government must central government in this regard but stand on
have the right to manage the natural resources in its accord.
the state. Moreover, the local government and the (d) A fully democratically elected Kachin State
local people must get involved in the management. government may further devolve management
Local constitutionally-based management powers powers to township or other local government
over land and natural resources can protect entities to best address the needs of local
minorities by bringing decision making power populations needs.
closer to the affected peoples. Specific aspects of (e) All levels of government must recognize the
management can be divided between the central management of the natural resources by the
and state governments, for example certain local people according to their customary law
standards on environment or safety could be set as the situation requires.
(f) Detailed natural resource management
at the national level. Management powers give
powers must be written into both the federal
legislative and executive authority over natural
and Kachin State constitutions.
resources; they determine who has ability to
make and enforce laws on the development and
C) Ensure Kachin State has the power to collect
exploitation of natural resources. In this way,
revenues from the state’s natural resources
management rights are more important than
ownership because the power to legislate and
Taxes and revenues on the use of natural resources
regulate natural-resources development
must be collected by a democratically elected
determines the rights, and the limits of the rights,
Kachin State government and the process clearly
of ownership.
and transparently explained to the residents of
the state. If the local and state governments do
Therefore Clause 37 (b) of Chapter 1 of the current
not use the revenues according to the wishes of
2008 constitution must be changed in a federal
local populations, officials can be voted out. In this
constitution from: “The Union shall enact necessary
way, the government will be more transparent and
law to supervise extraction and utilization of State
accountable to the needs of local people.
owned natural resources by economic forces” to
“The state shall enact necessary law to supervise
Natural resource revenue rights for Kachin State
extraction and utilization of State owned natural
should be based on the following principles:
resources by economic forces.”
(a) The Kachin State government must collect
Natural resource management rights for Kachin
taxes and revenues from the extraction and
State should be based on the following principles:
use of natural resources and related
development projects. The majority of the
(a) A fully democratically elected Kachin State
revenue should remain and be used within
government must have its own
Kachin State. A portion can be shared to the
administrative, legislative, and judicial power
central (Union) government for national use.
to manage resources within the state and the
(b) The collected tax revenues for Kachin state
right to delegate management powers to local should be further divided among local
levels of government. government bodies. Every level of government,
(b) A fully democratically elected Kachin State local, state and union must be democratically
government must have the right to manage elected.
and administer development plans based on (c) The Kachin State government must use the
its natural resources. revenues to design, implement, and manage
(c) The central government and foreign social, educational, health, and infrastructure
companies must not directly manage resource development programs with the collected
extraction and related development projects natural resource taxes. Local government
or control the process. The Kachin State entities should also play a role in determining

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 109
such programs. impacts on communities and lead to environmental
(d) The revenue provided to the central (Union) destruction. Therefore there must be a moratorium
government should support an “equalization on all new projects involving an area larger than
fund” to provide revenue to the poorer states 50 hectares.
of Burma for their health, education and
development programs. Large scale mono-crop plantations and factories
have been established within the boundaries of
The following guidelines should be followed in the Hugawng Tiger Reserve. Therefore to avoid
the collection and distribution of revenues from further exploitation of resources under the
natural resources: charade of a designated conservation area, there
must also be a moratorium on the establishment of
(a) People living in the area of natural resource any conservation areas or parks until constitutional
extraction or the related development project reform is instituted and local governments can
must receive a dividend of the profits. properly manage conservation areas.
(b) Tax collection must support the people’s
economy and reduce their poverty. Existing projects must be re-negotiated under the
(c) The largest percentage of the profits should new constitution.
not go to foreign investors.
(d) The local people must be provided employment. B) Allow and protect unrestricted civil participation
Training and job opportunities should be
opened to them. It is vital that civil society and community-based
(e) Working people must be paid a minimum wage groups play their role by monitoring the use of
which is to be democratically determined natural resources and implementation of the new
within Kachin State to allow sufficient income constitution and laws.
for their survival.
1. Community-based groups must raise awareness
among local people to know and understand
2. Interim Steps their rights.
2. The media and other monitoring groups must
A) Halt large scale resource extraction and operate freely to provide information.
related development projects during peace 3. Local communities must have the right to
process to minimize conflict organize referendums on large scale natural
resource development projects to determine
Political resolution, particularly around natural their consent.
resource management rights, in Kachin State
is essential for ending the conflict. If mega People must have freedom of expression and the
development projects are started before political right to protest if the company and government
resolution, there will be more conflict between confiscate land, exploits the community, or only
the government and ethnic armed groups and consider their own economic profits.
more conflict between the government and local
communities. This will have subsequent social

110 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
ENDNOTES
1. Global Witness interview with former official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 256-B).
2. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 240-D).
3. Chinese trade data taken from CTI (China Trade Institute) and UN Comtrade Database. See Appendix 1 for further details of data used and analysis
conducted.
4. See Appendix 1 for details of calculations.
5. World Bank, ‘Myanmar profile’; undated, http://data.worldbank.org/country/myanmar, last accessed 14 September 2015.
6. Calculations based on: (1) Kachin population estimate of 1,442,235. UNICEF, ‘Kachin State’; undated, http://www.unicef.org/myanmar/Kachin_
State_Profile_Final(1).pdf, last accessed 19 August 2015; and (2) Health figures taken from Myanmar government budget for the financial year
2014-2015.
7. Roger Keverne (Ed.), ‘Jade’, Anness Publishing; 1991, updated 2010, p.268.
8. Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, Harvard Kennedy School/Proximity Designs/Rajawali Foundation Institute for Asia, ‘Creating
a Future: Using Natural Resources for New Federalism and Unity’; July 2013, http://ash.harvard.edu/links/creating-future-using-natural-re-
sources-new-federalism-and-unity; last accessed 1 August 2015.
9. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 135-B).
10. Under s.31 of Myanmar’s 1995 Gemstone Law, a licence holder who pays the 10% tax on emporium jade sales is exempted from paying other
taxes. Despite this exemption, however, according to information provided by MGE and a current jade licence holder, under the 1995 Union Tax
Law a 15% commercial tax is also payable. In addition, companies are subject to a 25% income tax on net profits earned in kyat.
11. According to one estimate from an industry leader, around 70% of jade mining companies operate through 60%/40% joint ventures with the
state-owned enterprise MGE. In addition, as set out in Chapter 2, various army companies also hold stakes in jade mining operations, again on a
60%/40% basis.
12. See Appendix 1 for calculations.
13. Myanmar government budget for the financial year 2014-15.
14. World Bank, ‘Myanmar: Ending poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a time of transition. A Systematic Country Diagnostic’; November 2014,
http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/EAP/Myanmar/WBG_SCD_Full_Report_English.pdf, last accessed 2 August 2015.
15. ibid.
16. According to Physicians for Human Rights, the monthly running cost for three health clinics in Kachin State including rent, staff (10 people includ-
ing medical staff and administrators), medicine and communications amounts to US$4,900.
17. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 135-H).
18. For further details on the EITI, see http://eiti.org. It should be noted that Global Witness has a representative sitting as an alternate member of
the EITI International Board which oversees the scheme globally.
19. EITI International Secretariat, ‘The EITI Standard’, EITI; 11 July 2013, https://eiti.org/files/English_EITI%20STANDARD_11July_0.pdf, last accessed
19 August 2015.
20. EITI International Secretariat, ‘Civil Society Protocol’, EITI; 1 January 2015; https://eiti.org/files/EITI_CivilSocietyProtocol_Jan2015.pdf, last accessed
19 August 2015.
21. Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Liberia, ‘An Act Establishing the Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative’; 10 July 2009, http://www.leiti.
org.lr/uploads/2/1/5/6/21569928/act.pdf, last accessed 19 August 2015. Moore Stephens, ‘Liberia Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(LEITI) Post Award Process Audit, Final Report’; May 2013, http://www.leiti.org.lr/uploads/2/1/5/6/21569928/leiti_post_award_process_audit_fi-
nal_report.pdf, last accessed 19 August 2015.
22. Global Witness, ‘Azerbaijan Anonymous’; December 2013; https://www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/files/library/azerbaijan_anonymous_lr.pdf,
last accessed 19 August 2015. Human Rights Watch, ‘Reporters’ Guide: 2015 European Games in Baku, Azerbaijan’; 2015, http://www.hrw.org/
sites/default/files/related_material/Azerbaijan_Reporter’s_Guide.pdf, last accessed 19 August 2015.
23. Htoo International Industry Company & Htoo Gems and Jewellery Company, ‘Presentation on Jade Mining Operations’; 13 March 2015. Letter
from Kyauk Seinn Nagar (Gems) Co., Ltd to Global Witness; 2015.
24. EITI, ‘Myanmar admitted as EITI Candidate’; 2 July2014, https://eiti.org/news/myanmar-admitted-eiti-candidate, last accessed 19 August 2015.
25. Global Witness interviews with MGE; 2014 and 2015.
26. Global Witness interview with jade businessmen and with jade traders in Mandalay; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 69, 124-B and 155-156).
27. Global Witness interviews with jade businessmen, army company source and with Mandalay jade traders; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 155-
156, 205-B and 258).
28. Global Witness interview with MGE; 2015. Letter from MGE to Global Witness.
29. Global Witness interview with MGE; 2014.
30. ibid.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 111
31. Global Witness interview with former official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 256-A).
32. Global Witness interview with representatives of the MGJEA; 2015.
33. Letter from MGE to Global Witness; 2015.
34. Information provided to Global Witness by industry representative. (Global Witness reference 125).
35. Letter from MGE to Global Witness. Global Witness interviews with jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 218-B and 286).
36. Letter from MGE to Global Witness. Global Witness interview with MGE; 2015.
37. Please see Chapter 2, Part 2 (Army Companies) for further information on concession share arrangements with army companies.
38. Global Witness interview with MEHL; 2015. Global Witness interview with MGE; 2014.
39. Global Witness interviews with seven jade businessmen and an employee of MEHL; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6, 14, 58, 135, 258,
384, 472 and 473).
40. Letter from MGE to Global Witness; 2015.
41. Global Witness interview with representative of MGE; 2014.
42. Ministry of Mines, ‘Statement of the Ministry of Mining (121/99)’, 1 October 1999. [Translated from Myanmar language to English by Global Witness.]
43. Global Witness meeting with MGE; 2015.
44. Letter from MGE to Global Witness; 2015.
45. Global Witness interview with former official; 2015. (Global Witness interview 256-B).
46. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 135/137-A).
47. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 218-B).
48. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-A).
49. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 135-A).
50. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 384-B).
51. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 241-B).
52. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 6-C).
53. ibid.
54. Global Witness interview with former jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 243-C).
55. Global Witness interviews with former and current jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 218-B and 243-C).
56. Global Witness interview with former jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 243-C).
57. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 135/137-A).
58. Global Witness interview with former jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 243-C).
59. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 218-B).
60. Global Witness interview with former jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 243-C).
61. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 241-B).
62. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 310).
63. Global Witness interview with former official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 256-A).
64. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 218-B).
65. Global Witness interview with former jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview with 243-C).
66. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 241-B).
67. Letter from MGE to Global Witness. Global Witness interviews with three jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 136-D,
136-E and 218-B).
68. Global Witness interviews with representatives of MGE; 2015.
69. Letter from MGJEA to Global Witness; 2015.
70. According to MGE, jade can also be sold at the Mogoke Htaa Pwe Gems market and the Yangon Gems Market. In addition, as set out in Chapter 3,
a new market for very low-grade jade has recently been established in Kachin State. Letters from MGE, MGJEA and Kyauk Seinn Nagar (Gems)
Co. Ltd to Global Witness; 2015. Global Witness meeting with MGJEA; 2015.
71. Global Witness interviews with representatives of MGE; 2015.
72. Global Witness interviews with representatives of MGE; 2014.
73. Myanmar Gemstone Law 1995, s.17.

112 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
74. Global Witness interview with representative of jade company; 2015. (Global Witness interview 124-B).
75. ibid.
76. Global Witness interviews with jade traders, two jade businessmen and the employee of a jade company; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 124,
54-AG, 14-G and 427).
77. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-G).
78. Global Witness interview with former jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 54-AG).
79. Global Witness interviews with an official and with three jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 14-G, 54-AG, 56 and 124-B).
80. Global Witness interview with prominent jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 218).
81. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 218 and 384).
82. Bertil Lintner and Michael Black, ‘Merchants of Madness: The Methamphetamine Explosion in the Golden Triangle’, Silkworm Books, Chapter 6;
April 2009. Global Witness interview with former official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 256).
83. Jade businessmen, traders and a KIA/KIO official interviewed by Global Witness in Myanmar and China gave consistent accounts of companies
selling some jade at the official emporium whilst smuggling the rest directly to China. Three jade businessmen estimated that “big companies
smuggle at least 50% of the good jade they produce”, and a fourth that “large companies … carry… more than 50% [illegally]”. A prominent jade
mine owner estimated that “60-70% goes straight to the border” and another that “80% of jade from Hpakant is smuggled”, while an experi-
enced jade businessman and trader said that since 2011 50% of jade is typically smuggled. One Chinese jade trader suggested that “80% of
production is smuggled” whilst another said that “outside trade is more than 5-10 times legal trade”. A KIA/KIO official stated that 80% of jade
is smuggled out and sold on the black market. Only one interviewee gave an estimate of less than half of jade being smuggled, but he went on to
explain that the majority of legal sales are subject to price manipulation and tax evasion (Global Witness interviews 6-C, 47, 135-G, 218, 259-260,
378/243/263-B, 384-A and 411). See also Eleven, ‘Timber, jade account for more than half of smuggled goods seized’; 22 October 2014.
84. The data in this map is based on interviews with seven jade businessmen and one civil society representative; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 47, 101, 142, 234, 350, 352, 353 and 377).
85. A range of prominent and smaller scale jade businessmen and traders and a KIA/KIO official explained that high-value jade goes straight to
China, with a few stones going to the emporium for show. Typically, lower grade stones go to the emporium because they are bulky and harder
to smuggle. In one incident described to Global Witness, a small-scale jade businessman weighed up the costs of selling a jade boulder at
the emporium and smuggling it to China. Because the latter would have cost 40 million kyat (approximately US$40,000), and the jade piece was
medium quality commercial grade, he decided that using the official emporium sale would yield the better return. (Global Witness interviews
14-A, 14-G, 54-AI, 259 and 287).
86. Sales catalogue for the Fifty-Second Myanmar Gems Emporium in 2015. [Translated from Myanmar language to English by Global Witness.]
87. Wu Dingming, ‘A Panoramic View of Chinese Culture’, Simon & Schuster; May 2014.
88. The British Museum, ‘Chinese Jade’, undated, http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/online_tours/asia/chinese_jade/chinese_jade.aspx, last
accessed 2 June 2014. Celine Ge/AFP, ‘Bubble Trouble hits Hong Kong jade market’; 16 September 2013, http://www.chinapost.com.tw/business/
asia/hong-kong/2013/09/16/389014/Bubble-trouble.htm, last accessed 2 June 2015.
89. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 142-A).
90. Jeremy Page and Brian Spegele, ‘Chinese Communist Party Ousts a Former Top General’, Wall Street Journal; 30 June 2014, http://www.wsj.com/
articles/chinese-communist-party-ousts-a-former-top-general-on-bribe-taking-allegations-1404126279, last accessed 31 July 2015. The Economist,
‘Rank and vile: Xi Jinping flexes his muscle against army corruption’; 14 February 2015, http://www.economist.com/news/china/21643225-xi-
jinping-flexes-his-muscle-against-army-corruption-rank-and-vile, last accessed 31 July 2015. China Times, ‘Fallen PLA general Xu Caihu dies
of cancer prior to trial’; 16 March 2015, http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20150316000079&cid=1101, last accessed
31 July 2015. Reuters, ‘Former top China military official hoarded cash, jade in basement: Phoenix’; 20 November 2014; http://www.reuters.com/
article/2014/11/20/us-china-politics-corruption-idUSKCN0J412Q20141120, last accessed 31 July 2015. What’s on Weibo, ‘Money, Money, Money:
General Xu Caihou’s House Filled With Cash & Jade’; 20 November 2014; http://www.whatsonweibo.com/money-money-money-general-xu-
caihous-house-filled-with-cash-jade/, last accessed 31 July 2015.
91. Li Qian, ‘Craving for gemstone leads to deputy governor’s downfall’, Shanghai Daily; 16 December 2014, http://www.shanghaidaily.com/national/
Craving-for-gemstone-leads-to-deputy-governors-downfall/shdaily.shtml, last accessed 5 August 2015. South China Morning Post, ‘Chinese
official ‘traded influence for jade in cash-free graft case’; 8 January 2014, http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1400580/chinese-official-
traded-influence-jade-cash-free-graft-case, last accessed 5 August 2015. South China Morning Post, ‘Provincial official Ni Fake jailed for
17 years over multimillion dollar jade bribes’; 1 March 2015, http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1726392/provincial-official-jailed-
17-years-over-multimillion-dollar-jade-bribes, last accessed 5 August 2015. Dan Levin, ‘A Corruption Case Laden With Jade’, New York Times;
15 December 2014, http://sinosphere.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/12/15/a-corruption-case-laden-with-jade/?_r=0, last accessed 5 August 2015.
Harrison Jacobs, ‘Here’s the ridiculous loot that’s been found with corrupt officials’, Business Insider; 22 January 2015, http://uk.businessinsider.
com/the-ridiculous-loot-thats-been-found-with-corrupt-chinese-officials-2015-1?r=US&IR=T, last accessed 5 August 2015. Tom Philips, ‘China
executes Ferrari-loving billionaire ‘gangster’, The Telegraph; 9 February 2015, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/china/11399732/
China-executes-Ferrari-loving-billionaire-gangster.html, last accessed 5 August 2015. Benjamin Kang Lim, David Lague and Charlie Zhu,
‘Special Report: The power struggle behind the corruption crackdown’, Reuters; 23 May 2015, http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/05/23/us-
china-corruption-special-report-idUSBREA4M00120140523, last accessed 5 August 2015.
92. Global Witness interviews with jade businessman and with local community leader; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 142-C and 242).
93. Global Witness interviews with two prominent and small-scale jade businessmen, a local official, a former Ministry of Mines official, a former
jade company security guard, a Buddhist monk and two parliamentarians; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 14-A, 142-C, 239-C, 243-A, 256, 323,
326 and 339).
94. Global Witness interviews with two businessmen working with Chinese companies/backers; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 311-B and 320).
95. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-B).
96. ibid.
97. Ministry of Mines, ‘Jade mine tract areas map for phatsat [joint venture] mining and Myanmar Gems and Jewellery Trading Enterprise: Hpakant,
Lonekhin and Ta-mahkan regions’; 8 April 1991.
98. Global Witness interviews with former and current jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 202-A and 218-B).

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 113
99. Global Witness interview with jade industry representative; 2014. (Global Witness interview 135-A).
100. Global Witness interviews with representative of machine supplier and with jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 416, 6-C and 286.).
101. Global Witness interviews with machine company representative and jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 65 and 416).
102. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6-C and 65).
103. Letter from MGE to Global Witness. This states that 8,491 lots were sold at the 50th gemstone emporium in 2013, for 2,403,216,267 euros. Payment
was received for 6,971 lots in the amount of 1,317,916,432 euros.
104. The sum given here in US dollars is based on the conversion rate of 1.3596 US dollars to the euro which was the average daily exchange rate
across the days that the 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium took place, http://www.oanda.com/currency/converter/.
105. The sum given here in US dollars is based on the conversion rate of 1.3187 US dollars to the euro which was the average daily exchange rate
across the days that the 2013 Myanmar Gems Emporium took place, http://www.oanda.com/currency/converter/.
106. International Human Rights Law Clinic at Harvard Law School, ‘Crimes in Burma’; 2009, http://hrp.law.harvard.edu/wp-content/uploads/2009/05/
Crimes-in-Burma.pdf, last accessed 19 August 2015. International Human Rights Law Clinic at Harvard Law School, ‘Legal Memorandum: War
Crimes and Crimes against Humanity in Eastern Myanmar’; November 2014, http://hrp.law.harvard.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/2014.11.05-
IHRC-Legal-Memorandum.pdf, last accessed 19 August 2015. Benedict Rogers, ‘Than Shwe – unmasking Burma’s Tyrant’, Chapter 4, Silkworm
Press; 2010.
107. Jared Ferrie / Reuters, ‘Photo of Myanmar’s reclusive former dictator Than Shwe surfaces on Facebook’; 27 March 2015, http://www.independent.
ie/world-news/asia-pacific/photo-of-myanmars-reclusive-former-dictator-than-shwe-surfaces-on-facebook-31099311.html, last accessed 19
August 2015. Min Zin / New York Times, ‘Return of the Myanmar Military?’; 17 November 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/18/opinion/
return-of-the-myanmar-military.html?_r=0, last accessed 19 August 2015. Bertil Lintner / Foreign Policy, ‘The Military’s Still in Charge’, http://
foreignpolicy.com/2013/07/09/the-militarys-still-in-charge, last accessed 20 August 2015.
108. Larry Jagan / Bangkok Post, ‘Thein Sein in Palace Coup to Boost Support’; 14 August 2015, http://www.bangkokpost.com/opinion/opinion/655372/
thein-sein-in-palace-coup-to-boost-support, last accessed 19 August 2015.
109. ibid.
110. Global Witness interview with political analyst; 2015. (Global Witness interview 381).
111. Global Witness interview with Ministry of Mines official; 2015. (Global Witness interview 54-D).
112. Global Witness interview with long-time Myanmar commentator; 2015. (Global Witness interview 413).
113. DICA records for Kyaing International and Kyaing International Gems downloaded in November 2014 register Win Tin to the address 1000/A Shwe
Hninsi St, Yangon. This is the same address as the one recorded for Kyaing San Shwe, Thant Zaw Shwe and Htun Naing Shwe’s wife Khin Thanda
in the DICA database entry for Naing Group Syndicate and for Thant Zaw Shwe in the list of directors for Myanmar Naing Group Gems (both records
retrieved October 2014): DICA record for Kyaing International Gems Co. Ltd and Kyaing International Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-
aas.net; 3 November 2014 (these records are no longer available in full form). DICA record for Naing Group Syndicate Co. Ltd and Myanmar Naing
Group Gems Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015.
114. Communication from jade industry expert group; 2014. Global Witness interview with community leader; 2014. (Global Witness interview 242).
115. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2014); MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone Khin Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade
Mining Blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). Kachin Independence Organisation register of jade mining companies ‘Maw Sizar block’ (in use as of 2014).
116. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2014); MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone Khin Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade
Mining Blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014).
117. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2014); MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone Khin Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade
Mining Blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). Kachin Independence Organisation register of jade mining companies ‘Wah Kye Maw’ (in use as of 2014).
118. MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014).
119. MGE, ‘Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of end of 2012). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade
Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of 2012).
120. MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). MGE, ‘Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in
use as of end of 2012).
121. MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land Joint Venture
Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of 2012).
122. MGE, ‘Gwi Hkar Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2015).
123. MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of 2012).
124. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures; 2013 and 2014.
125. Communication from jade industry expert group; 2014. Global Witness interviews with a community leader, a jade company employee, a KIA/KIO
advisor and three jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 142-B, 218-B, 242, 312, 324 and 338).
126. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 177-B and 218-B).
127. Up until at least October 2014, DICA registry records showed that Kywe Wa Sone / Richest Gems shared a director, Tin Win, with Tet Kham Gems.
By September 2015, however, Tin Win no longer appeared on the Kywe Wa Sone / Richest Gems listing. In DICA registry records for Tet Kham
Gems, Aik Haw is listed under the alias Aung Hein. Aik Haw is profiled in the section of this report about companies linked to the United Wa State
Army. Global Witness interview with international expert on the narcotics industry; 2015. (Global Witness interview 296-A). DICA records for Tet
Kham Gems Co. Ltd, retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net; 6 September 2015.
128. DICA record for Richest Gems Co. Ltd and Tet Kham Gems and Jewellery Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the
Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. DICA, ‘Company Information Report’; June 2013. U.S. Department of The Treasury, ‘SDN List by Country’,
http://www.treasury.gov/ofac/downloads/ctrylst.txt, last accessed 19 August 2015. U.S. Treasury Office of Foreign Assets Control, ‘Wei Hsueh
Kang United Wa State Army Financial Network’; November 2008, http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Documents/
wa_chart_11292008.pdf, last accessed 13 August 2015.

114 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
129. Global Witness observations and interviews with local politicians and residents; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 382, 383 and 424).
130. Global Witness interviews with a jade company consultant, a jade businessman and a humanitarian worker; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 202-E, 236-B, 378).
131. Global Witness interview with employee of jade mining company; 2014. (Global Witness interview 72-B). Communication from KDNG, March 2015.
132. BBC, ‘Burma leader’s lavish lifestyle aired’; 2 November 2006, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/6109356.stm, last accessed 12 April 2015.
Benedict Rogers, ‘Than Shwe – unmasking Burma’s Tyrant’, Chapter 5, Silkworm Press; 2010.
133. Global Witness interviews with two political analysts; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 127-B/C and197-D). Kyaw Hsu Mon / The Irrawaddy,
‘Aung Thaung Blacklisted for Links to Anti-Muslim Violence: Analysts’; 3 November 2014, http://www.irrawaddy.org/burma/aung-thaung-black-
listed-links-anti-muslim-violence-analysts.html, last accessed 12 April 2015.
134. The leaked video of the wedding is available on You Tube, in a series of clips starting at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j8-2Ggd5Ng0 (last
accessed 4 October 2015). Jonathan Watts, ‘Burmese outraged at lavish junta wedding’, The Guardian; 2 November 2006, http://www.theguard-
ian.com/world/2006/nov/02/burma.jonathanwatts; last accessed 4 October 2015. Ed Cropley, ‘Lavish wedding video sparks outrage’, Reuters; 2
November 2006, http://uk.reuters.com/article/2006/11/02/tech-myanmar-wedding1-dc-idUKBKK1738220061102; last accessed 4 October 2015.
135. Global Witness interview with long-time Myanmar commentator; 2015. (Global Witness interview 413).
136. Shwe Yinn Mar Oo, Ko Ko Gyi and Thomas Kean / Myanmar Times, ‘Opposition MPs cleared of fraud’; 20 June 2011, http://www.mmtimes.com/
index.php/national-news/2535-opposition-mps-cleared-of-fraud.html, last accessed 25 August 2015. Maung Aung Myoe, ‘Building the Tatmadaw:
Myanmar Armed Forces Since 1948’, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies; 2009, p.231. Global Witness interview with humanitarian worker; 2014.
(Global Witness interview 202-B).
137. Global Witness interviews with a KIA/KIO representative, a civil society organisation representative, a civil society organisation, a MEHL repre-
sentative and four jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 395-398, 185-A, 18-J, 197-B, and 14-B, 349, 6-C, 310). See also
Mandy Sadan, ‘Being and Becoming Kachin’, the British Academy / Oxford University Press; 2013, p.338, footnote 19.
138. Global Witness interviews with four jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 14-B, 218, 349 and 263).
139. DICA record for Myanmar Win Gate Gems and Jewellery Mining Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net; 3 November 2014 (this record
is no longer available in full form). Myanmar Win Gate ‘Welcome to MyanmarWingate.com’, http://www.myanmarwingate.com, last accessed 2
October 2015.
140. DICA record for Myanmar Win Gate Gems and Jewellery Mining Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net; 3 November 2014 (this record
is no longer available in full form). DICA record for Myanmar Win Gate Gems and Jewellery Mining Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October
2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. DICA, ‘Company Information Report’; June 2013. European Commission,
‘Commission Regulation (EU) No 411/2010’; 10 May 2010, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32010R0411, last accessed
9 April 2015.
141. European Commission, ‘Commission Regulation (EU) No 411/2010’; 10 May 2010, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:32010R0411, last accessed 9 April 2015.
142. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2014); MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone Khin Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade
Mining Blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). KIO register of jade mining companies ‘Wah Kye Maw’ (in use as of 2014). MGE, ‘Gwi Hkar Treasure Land
and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2015).
143. Meeting with MEHL; 2015.
144. MGE, ‘51st Myanmar Gems Emporium Sold Lot List’; 2014. The sum given here in U.S. dollars (and in all figures for June 2014) is based on the
conversion rate of 1.3596 U.S. dollars to the euro which was the average daily exchange rate across the days that the 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium
took place, http://www.oanda.com/currency/converter/.
145. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2014.
146. For an uploaded version of Minister Ohn Myint’s speech, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SxH7M9H1oDw, last accessed 25 August 2015.
147. DVB, ‘Magwe demands ‘Slapper’ Ohn Myint step down; 11 February 2014, http://www.dvb.no/news/magwe-demands-slapper-ohn-myint-step-
down-burma-myanmar-2/37072, last accessed 25 August 2015.
148. Larry Jagan / Asia Times, ‘Electoral test for Myanmar reforms’, 31 March 2012, http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Southeast_Asia/NC31Ae01.html,
last accessed 28 August 2015. Myanmar Pyithu Hluttaw, ‘Maung Maung Thein profile’ http://www.pyithuhluttaw.gov.mm/?q=representative%2F%E
1%80%A6%E1%80%B8%E1%80%B1%E1%80%99%E1%80%AC%E1%80%84%E1%80%B9%E1%80%B1%E1%80%99%E1%80%AC%E1%80%84%E
1%80%B9%E1%80%9E%E1%80%AD%E1%80%99%E1%80%B9%E1%80%B8, last accessed 28 August 2015.
149. Larry Jagan / Mizzima News, ‘Splits emerge in Burma’s army over country’s roadmap’; 21 March 2008, http://archive-2.mizzima.com/edop/
analysis/323-splits-emerge-in-burmas-army-over-countrys-roadmap.html, last accessed 28 August 2015. Global Witness interview with political
analyst; 2015. (Global Witness interview 381). Global Witness research, interview with industry source; August 2001 / Global Witness, ‘A Conflict of
Interests’, p.43; 2013, https://www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/files/import/03sep3%20Conflict%20of%20Interests%2030-59.pdf.
150. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 218-B and 311). MGE, ‘Hpakant Treasure Land and
related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2014). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of
2012). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014).
151. Global Witness interview with journalist; 2015. (Global Witness interview 410).
152. DICA record for Myat Yamon Trading Co. Ltd, Myat Yamon Gems Co. Ltd and Myo Nwe Gems Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014
and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. Equivalent records downloaded from the DICA online database http://dica.gov.
mm.x-aas.net/; October 2015. Communication from courier company; 2015.
153. Myanmar Pyithu Hluttaw, ‘Maung Maung Thein profile’ http://www.pyithuhluttaw.gov.mm/?q=representative%2F%E1%80%A6%E1%80%B8%E
1%80%B1%E1%80%99%E1%80%AC%E1%80%84%E1%80%B9%E1%80%B1%E1%80%99%E1%80%AC%E1%80%84%E1%80%B9%E1%80%9E
%E1%80%AD%E1%80%99%E1%80%B9%E1%80%B8, last accessed 17 April 2015.
154. Min Thein’s NRC number can be identified via DICA records for Thone Pwint Hsain Co. Ltd timber company, which previous Global Witness
investigations have revealed he controls: Global Witness research, interview with industry source; August 2001 / Global Witness, ‘A Conflict of

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 115
Interests’; 2013, p.43, https://www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/files/import/03sep3%20Conflict%20of%20Interests%2030-59.pdf. In Global
Witness’ 2003 report, the company’s name is spelled Thone Pwint Saing Co. Ltd. We believe the divergence in spelling in the DICA records relates
to a difference in the system used for transcribing the Myanmar name into Roman letters. DICA record for Myo Nwe Gems & Jewellery Co. Ltd
and Thone Pwint Hsain Co. Ltd, http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net, last accessed 27 August 2015.
155. Global Witness interview with civil society organisation; 2015. (Global Witness interview 18-J). Communication from Myanmar company; 2015.
156. Letter to Global Witness from Nay Aung; 2015.
157. Global Witness interviews with jade businessman, a civil society organisation and local resident; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interview 263 and 18-J).
158. Film footage provided by local resident; 2015. Footage of the same incident (which does not identify the site as a Myat Yamon mine) can also be
accessed at Radio Free Asia, ‘Unbridled Jade Mining Triggers Deadly Landslides in Myanmar’, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rWd1PSluDe0,
last accessed 5 October 2015. Global Witness interviews with jade businessman and local residents; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 404
and 128-G). Xinhua, ‘Nearly 70 missing in landslide in Myanmar’s jade mining area’; 9 April 2015, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-
04/09/c_134138004.htm, last accessed 5 October 2015.
159. Global Witness interview with former official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 256-B).
160. Communication from Ministry of Mines; 2015. MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). Global
Witness interview with political analyst; 2015. (Global Witness interview 381). DICA record for Shwe Innwa Gems Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.
gov.mm.x-aas.net; 30 August 2015. DICA record for Shwe Innwa Gems Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the
Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. Euro-Burma Office, ‘Political Monitor / Official Media / 25 February to 16 March 2012’, p.8-9, https://
euroburmaoffice.s3.amazonaws.com/filer_public/84/e7/84e7871d-613b-41f9-b7de-d2e023b730da/pm_no_7_-_27-03-12.pdf, last accessed 11
June 2015.
161. DICA, ‘Company Information Report’; June 2013. Communication from courier company; 2015. U.S. Embassy Rangoon, ‘Burma: State-Owned
Enterprise Demonstrates Military’s Hold on Economy’; 6 February 2009, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/09RANGOON83_a.html, last
accessed 31 August 2015. Mizzima News, ‘Junta-controlled firm opens shopping centre in Rangoon’; 11 October 2010, http://archive-2.mizzima.
com/business/4432-junta-controlled-firm-opens-shopping-centre-in-rangoon.html, last accessed 31 August 2015.
162. Global Witness meeting with MEHL. DICA record for Myanmar Imperial Jade (Gems & Jewellery) Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October
2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015.
163. Courier company report; 2015.
164. US Embassy Rangoon, ‘Update On Myanmar Economic Holdings’ Activities’; 6 February 2009, https://search.wikileaks.org/plusd/
cables/09RANGOON77_a.html, last accessed 4 October 2015. DICA record for Myanmar Imperial Jade (Gems & Jewellery) Co. Ltd extracted by
OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015.
165. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2013 and 2014.
166. In English language publications, MEHL spells its name Myanma Economic Holdings Limited, without an ‘r’ at the end of Myanmar. By contrast,
the other big army company, Myanmar Economic Corporation, spells Myanmar with an ‘r’.
167. Communication from Ministry of Mines; 2015. Global Witness interviews with representative of MEC and political analyst; 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 302 and 483). Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2013 and 2014. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map
(in use as of mid-2014). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). Maung Aung Myoe, ‘Building the
Tatmadaw: Myanmar Armed Forces Since 1948’, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies; 2009, p.186. DICA record for Shwe Innwa Gems Co. Ltd and
Northern Star Gems and Jewellery Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net; 30 August 2015. DICA record for Shwe Innwa Gems Co.
Ltd and Northern Star Gems and Jewellery Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation;
March 2015.
168. Global Witness interview with former MEHL employee; 2014. (Global Witness interview 484). Sean Turnell, ‘Burma’s Economy and the Struggle
for Reform’ in Mikael Gravers and Flemming Ytzen (eds) ‘Burma / Myanmar – Where Now?’, NIAS Press; 2014, p. 382. International Crisis Group,
‘Myanmar: the politics of economic reform’, Asia Report N°231; July 2012, http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/files/asia/south-east-asia/burma-
myanmar/231-myanmar-the-politics-of-economic-reform.pdf, last accessed 28 August 2015.
169. Sean Turnell, ‘Burma’s Economy and the Struggle for Reform’ in Mikael Gravers and Flemming Ytzen (eds) ‘Burma / Myanmar – Where Now?’,
NIAS Press; 2014, p. 382. International Crisis Group, ‘Myanmar: the politics of economic reform’, Asia Report N°231; July 2012, http://www.crisis-
group.org/~/media/files/asia/south-east-asia/burma-myanmar/231-myanmar-the-politics-of-economic-reform.pdf, last accessed 28 August 2015.
170. Global Witness interviews with political analyst and former official; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 268 and 256-B). International Crisis
Group, ‘Myanmar: the politics of economic reform’, Asia Report N°231; July 2012, http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/files/asia/south-east-asia/
burma-myanmar/231-myanmar-the-politics-of-economic-reform.pdf, last accessed 28 August 2015. Sean Turnell, ‘Burma’s Economy and the
Struggle for Reform’ in Mikael Gravers and Flemming Ytzen (eds) ‘Burma / Myanmar – Where Now?’, NIAS Press; 2014, p. 382.
171. Global Witness interview with former official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 256-B).
172. Amnesty International, ‘Open for Business? Corporate Crime and Abuses at Myanmar Copper Mine’; February 2015, https://www.amnesty.org/
en/documents/asa16/0003/2015/en, last accessed 28 August 2015. Lawyers’ Network and Justice Trust, ‘Submission of Evidence to Myanmar
Government’s Letpadaung Investigation Commission’; 1 December 2012, http://www.humanrights.asia/news/press-releases/pdf/2013/AHRC-
PRL-007-2013.pdf, last accessed 28 August 2015. BBC, ‘Burma confirms phosphorus used at mine protest’; 12 March, 2013, http://www.bbc.
co.uk/news/world-asia-21751357, last accessed 28 August 2015.
173. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015. Global Witness interviews with three jade businessmen and a jade industry consultant; 2014 and 2015.
(Global Witness interviews 14-G-H, 218, 310 and 236). Mary P Callahan, ‘Making Enemies’, Cornell Press; 2003, p. 214 describes MEHL in general
terms as controlling the gems industry at this time.
174. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-D).
175. Global Witness interviews with a lawyer, an MEHL employee and a jade businessman; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 360, 484 and 218-B).
176. MEHL, ‘Twelfth Annual Report of the Year 2001-2002’; 3 June 2002, reproduced in Sein Htay / Federation of Trade Unions-Burma, ‘Economic
Report on Burma 2004/05’, Annex 3; 2005, http://www.burmalibrary.org/docs12/FTUB-Economic-Report-Sein_Htay2004-05-red.pdf, last accessed
28 September 2015. Global Witness asked an expert on the activities of MEHL to review this document and they believe it to be authentic. Global
Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-H).
177. New Light of Myanmar, ‘Lt-Gen Tin Aye visits UMEHL jade, gem sales’; 27 January 2005. New Light of Myanmar, ‘UMEHL Gem and Jade Sales’; 15
May 2002. New Light of Myanmar, ‘13th Gems and lade Sales of UMEHL continues’, 14 July 2000.

116 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
178. New Light of Myanmar, ‘Ministry of Mines Holds Coordination Meeting’; 30 June 2001. New Light of Myanmar, ‘Commentary on Myanmar Jade
Business’; 9 October 2001. New Light of Myanmar, ‘Significant Mid-Year Myanmar Gems Emporium’; 3 November 2002. Global Witness interview
with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 218-B).
179. Global Witness interviews with a humanitarian worker and two jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 202, 135-C and 6-C).
180. Global Witness interview with a former official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 256-B).
181. Andrew RC Marshall and Min Zayar Oo / Reuters, ‘Myanmar’s old guard runs a jade empire’; 29 September 2013, http://graphics.thomsonreuters.
com/13/09/MYANMAR-JADE.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015.
182. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015.
183. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015.
184. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2014) and a MGE map of the same name in use in late 2012. These
maps designate MEHL zones as follows: San Hkar – 125 acres; Hmaw Wam area – 87 acres and Taw Maw – unspecified acreage. Assuming the
Taw Maw mine is drawn roughly to scale, it would appear to cover around 80-100 acres.
185. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 6-C).
186. Global Witness interviews with three jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 135-C, 6-C and 14-B).
187. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015. Letter from MEHL; 2015.
188. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015.
189. Global Witness interviews with five jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 14-A, 135-C, 384-A, 472 and 473).
190. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015. Letter from MEHL; 2015.
191. Global Witness interviews with three jade businessman and an employee of MEHL; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6-C, 14-A, 58 and 484).
192. Letter from MEHL; 2015.
193. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 6-C).
194. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of late 2012).
195. Letter from MEHL; 2015.
196. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015.
197. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-G).
198. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-G).
199. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-G).
200. Global Witness interview with two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interview 135-C and 65-F).
201. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 67-B).
202. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-G).
203. Letter from MEHL; 2015.
204. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2014. MGJEA list of top 70 jade vendors at Myanmar’s Golden Jubilee (50th) Emporium; 2013.
MGJEA, ‘List of Joint Venture companies, cooperatives & private companies’; 13 July 2013. Communication from jade business expert; May 2014.
MGJEA, ‘Presentation on the Facts and Figures of the 50th Myanmar Gems Emporium’; 2013.
205. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015. Letter from MEHL; 2015.
206. Quote from Mary P Callahan, ‘Making Enemies’, Cornell Press; 2003, p.214. Global Witness interview with KIA/KIO representatives; 2015. (Global
Witness interview 395).
207. Tan Yawen 谭谭谭 Yang Zhe 谭谭 / Chinanews, ‘President Thein Sein visited Lingguangsi in Beijing’; 18 June 2014, http://www.chinanews.com/
gj/2014/06-28/6329769.shtml, last accessed 11 August 2015. Jade-Juecui (a Wechat account / public blog) ‘Myanmar’s President praised the jade
carving in the temple of Beijing; 29 June 2014, http://wx.paigu.com/a/695620/32074824.html, last accessed 11 August 2015. This Jade-Juecai
article states that President Thein Sein considers the Buddha to represent the friendship between Chinese and Burmese, because it is carved in
China, and the jade is from Myanmar. It also refers to Zhang Yingchun (the Chinese name of Ever Winner boss Aike Htwe) as the provider of the
jade and includes his picture.
208. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2013 and 2014.
209. Global Witness interviews with family member of jade businessman and a jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 379 and 380). Letter
to Global Witness from Ei Ei Htwe; 2015. Record for Yadanar Pyi Phyo Aung Gems Co. Ltd from DICA online database http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.
net, retrieved 30 September 2015.
210. Global Witness interviews with a community leader and two jade businessman; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 242, 218-B and 309).
211. DICA record for Ever Winner Gems Co. Ltd, Ever Winner Trading Co. Ltd, Lin Lett Win Yadanar Gems Co. Ltd, Pho Thar Htoo Gems Co. Ltd, Kaung
Myat Thukha Co. Ltd, Than Lwin Aye Yar Gems Co. Ltd, Yadanar Sin Thiri Trading Co. Ltd, Khine Myanmar Gems, ARS International Ltd, extracted
by Open Corporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. Records for same companies from DICA online
database http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net, retrieved 19 August 2015. Communication from Ministry of Mines regarding licence allocations; 2015.
212. Communication from KBZ; 2015. Sihui Shipin / Sihui Jade Article Credit Information, Event21 December 2012, http://yqxy.sihui.gov.cn/Item/2402.
aspx, last accessed 11 August 2015.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 117
213. Gems and Jewellery Trade Association of China, ‘Leader of Gems, Jewellery Trade Association of China’, http://www.jewellery.org.cn/wz.aspx?CID
=0&ClassID=285&Maticsoft=1&Ms=285, last accessed 11 August 2015. Embassy in Myanmar / Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic
of China, ‘Chinese Ambassador to Myanmar Accepts Donation for Earthquake Disaster Area in Yunnan from Yunnan Chamber of Commerce’; 21
August 2014, http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_chn/zwbd_602255/jghd_602270/t1184446.shtml, last accessed 11 August 2015. Houlan Yang / Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, ‘Chinese Ambassador to Myanmar Houlan Yang made a speech in supervisory committee’s
inauguration ceremony’; 25 January 2014, http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_chn/dszlsjt_602260/t1122980.shtml, last accessed 11 August 2015.
Myanmar Golden Phoenix, ‘People in Yunnan Chamber of Commerce to celebrate Chinese New Year’; 3 March 2014, http://www.mmgpmedia.
com/business/5634-2013-12-11-09-10-07, last accessed 11 August 2015.
214. Communication from jade industry experts; 2014. Global Witness interviews with a community leader, a politician, a jade businessman and a
contractor to jade companies; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 242-B, 243-B, 218-B and 348).
215. DICA records for ARS International Co. Ltd, Ever Winner Gems Co. Ltd, Kaung Myat Thukha Co. Ltd, Khine Myanmar Gems Co. Ltd, Lin Lett Win
Yadanar Gems Co. Ltd, Pho Thar Htoo Gems Co. Ltd, Than Lwin Aye Yar Gems Co. Ltd, Yadanar Pyi Phyo Aung Gems & Jewellery Co. Ltd, Yadanar
Shwe Yi Win Gems Co. Ltd, Yadanar Sin Thiri Trading Co. Ltd, extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge
Foundation; March 2015. DICA, ‘Company Information Report’; June 2013. MGE, ‘Lone Khin Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of
mid-2014); MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone Khin Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone
Khin Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of 2012). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’
(in use as of mid-2014). MGE, ‘Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of end of 2012). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure
Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of 2012). Communication from Ministry of Mines; 2015. Communication from Burma Free
Rangers; 2015. Communication from jade industry expert group 2014. Global Witness interviews with a community leader, a contractor to jade
companies, local residents, a consultant to jade companies, a KIA officer and two jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews
14-G, 218-B, 242, 236-A, 348, 345 and 346). Letter from Ei Ei Htwe; 2015.
216. Letter from Ei Ei Htwe to Global Witness; 2015.
217. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 65-G). Eleven Media, ‘Villages, including in Hpakant Township,
are worrying about floods in the monsoon seasons because the waste soil from nearby jade projects run by seven companies is being thrown into
Ever Lake’; 2 May 2015.
218. Global Witness interviews with businessman and two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 416, 248 and 250).
219. DICA record for Yadanar Sin Thiri Trading Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation;
March 2015. Communication from Ministry of Mines; 2015. Yadanar Sin Thiri Gems, http://ystgems.com/index.php?option=com_contact&view=
category&catid=8&Itemid=13, last accessed 15 August 2015. Global Witness interviews with jade trader and an official; 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 65-E and 485). Aung Hla Htun and Jared Ferrie / Reuters, ‘Two dead, 30 missing after rockslide at Myanmar jade mine’, 7 January
2015, http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/01/07/uk-myanmar-mine-idUKKBN0KG1GL20150107, last accessed 15 August 2015. Nyein Nyein / The
Irrawaddy, ‘Death Toll Climbs to 4, Search Ongoing After Hpakant Rockslide’, 8 January 2015, http://www.irrawaddy.org/burma/death-toll-climbs-
4-search-ongoing-hpakant-rockslide.html, last accessed 15 August 2015.
220. Global Witness interview with local residents; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 345 and 346).
221. Global Witness interview with international economist; 2015. (Global Witness interview 217).
222. KBZ, ‘KBZ Cards’, https://www.facebook.com/KBZCards/info?tab=page_info, last accessed 28 September 2015. Meeting with KBZ; 2015.
223. Myanmar Ministry of Finance, ‘Top 1000 Myanmar Income Tax paying companies for the year 2013-2014’.
224. Myanmar Centre for Responsible Business, ‘Pwint Thit Sa – Transparency in Myanmar Enterprises / First Report’; July 2014, p.18, http://www.
myanmar-responsiblebusiness.org/pdf/2014-07-22-Pwint-Thit-Sa-First-Report.pdf, last accessed 19 August 2015. Myanmar Centre for Responsible
Business, ‘Pwint Thit Sa – Transparency in Myanmar Enterprises / Second Report’; July 2015, p.13, http://www.myanmar-responsiblebusiness.
org/news/second-pwint-thit-sa-time-report.html, last accessed 19 August 2015.
225. KBZ Group of Companies, ‘Code of Conduct’, 24 June 2014, http://www.kbzgroup.com.mm/sites/default/files/kbz_coc_eng.pdf, last accessed 19
August 2015.
226. KBZ Group, ‘Corporate Structure’, http://www.kbzgroup.com.mm/corporate_structure, last accessed 19 August 2015.
227. KBZ letter to Global Witness; 2015. Global Witness meeting with KBZ; 2015. Communication from KBZ; 2015.
228. KBZ letter to Global Witness; 2015. Global Witness meeting with KBZ; 2015. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global
Witness interviews 54 and 486).
229. Communication from KBZ; 2015.
230. US Embassy Rangoon, ‘Sanctioning Private Burmese Companies under the JADE Act’; 19 November 2008, https://wikileaks.org/
cable/2008/11/08RANGOON896.html, last accessed 1 October 2015.
231. KBZ Group, ‘A closer look at KBZ Group of Companies’; 2011.
232. KBZ Group, ‘A closer look at KBZ Group of Companies’; 2011.
233. Global Witness interview with industry consultant; 2014. (Global Witness interview 236).
234. Global Witness interviews with industry consultant and jade businessman; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 218-B and 236).
235. KBZ Group of Companies, ‘Code of Conduct’, 24 June 2014, http://www.kbzgroup.com.mm/sites/default/files/kbz_coc_eng.pdf, last accessed 19
August 2015.
236. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 218-B).
237. Global Witness meeting with KBZ; 2015.
238. Global Witness interview with businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 379).
239. KBZ letter to Global Witness; 2015. DICA record for IKBZ Co. Ltd, extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge
Foundation; March 2015. Record for IKBZ from DICA online database http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net, retrieved 19 August 2015.
240. DICA record for IKBZ Co. Ltd, extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. Record
for IKBZ from DICA online database http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net, retrieved 19 August 2015.

118 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
241. KBZ letter to Global Witness; 2015.
242. Letter to Global Witness from Ei Ei Htwe; 2015.
243. KBZ letter to Global Witness; 2015.
244. KBZ letter to Global Witness; 2015.
245. MGE, ‘51st Myanmar Gems Emporium Sold Lot List’; 2014. The sum given here in US dollars (and in all figures for June 2014) is based on the
conversion rate of 1.3596 US dollars to the euro which was the average daily exchange rate across the days that the 2014 Myanmar Gems Emporium
took place, http://www.oanda.com/currency/converter/. Meeting with MEHL and Myanmar Imperial Jade; 2015.
246. Letter to Global Witness from MEHL; 2015.
247. Communication from KBZ; 2015.
248. Bertil Lintner, ‘Blood Brothers – Crime, Business and Politics in Asia’, Silkworm Books, 2003, pages 262-263, 268. US Embassy Rangoon, ‘Dropping
the Hammer on Crony Steven Law, 28 December 2007, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/07RANGOON1211_a.html, last accessed 28
September 2015. The Economist, ‘Obituary – Lo Hsing Han, heroin king and business tycoon, died on July 6th, aged about 80’; 27July 2013, http://
www.economist.com/news/obituary/21582234-lo-hsing-han-heroin-king-and-business-tycoon-died-july-6th-aged-about-80-lo-hsing-han, last
accessed 4 September 2015. For background Lo Hsing-Han’s career as a drugs trafficker and warlord, see Bertil Lintner – Opium and Insurgency
Since 1948’, Silkworm Books; 1999, pages 230-231, 264-265, 270, 365-366; Alfred W McCoy, ‘The Politics of Heroin – CIA Complicity in the Global
Drug Trade’ (Revised Edition), Lawrence Hill Books; 2003, pages 423-427, 434, 438; Martin Smith, ‘Burma-Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity’,
Zed Books Ltd; 1999, pages 95-96, 315, 380, 427-428. US Department of The Treasury, ‘SDN List by Country’, http://www.treasury.gov/ofac/down-
loads/ctrylst.txt, last accessed 4 September 2015.
249. Global Witness interviews with businessman and a MGE official; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 168 and 215). US Embassy Rangoon, ‘Dropping
the Hammer on Crony Steven Law, 28 December 2007, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/07RANGOON1211_a.html, last accessed 1 October
2015. The Irrawaddy, ‘Tracking the Tycoons’; September 2008 Volume 16 No.9, http://www2.irrawaddy.org/article.php?art_id=14151&page=2, last
accessed 4 September 2015.
250. Flemming Ytzen, ‘The Myitsone Entanglement’ in Mikael Gravers and Flemming Ytzen (eds) ‘Burma / Myanmar – Where Now?’, NIAS Press; 2014,
p.358. Victoria Heather / DVB ‘VP pushed out over corruption, resistance to reforms’; 24 May 2012, http://www.kdng.org/news/34-news/248--vp-
pushed-out-over-corruption-resistance-to-reforms.html, last accessed 28 September 2015.
251. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2013 and 2014.
252. DICA record for Yadanar Taung Tann Gems Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation;
March 2015. DICA, ‘Company Information Report’; June 2013. For Steven Law’s aliases, see, for example: US Embassy Rangoon, ‘Dropping the
Hammer on Crony Steven Law’, 28 December 2007, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/07RANGOON1211_a.html, last accessed 28 September
2015.
253. DICA record for Yadanar Taung Tann Gems Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net 4 September 2015.
254. Lin Thant and Seamus Martov / The Irrawaddy, ‘Canada Says Burma Invited Controversial Tycoon on Trade Tour’; 30 June 2014, http://www.
irrawaddy.org/burma/canada-says-burma-invited-controversial-tycoon-trade-tour.html, last accessed 4 September 2015. Lin Thant and Seamus
Martov / The Irrawaddy, ‘Canada Welcomes Tycoon Tied to Drugs, but Denies Visa to Kachin Activist’; 24 June 2014, http://www.irrawaddy.org/
burma/canada-welcomes-tycoon-tied-drugs-denies-visa-kachin-activist.html, last accessed 4 September 2015.
255. Lin Thant and Seamus Martov / The Irrawaddy, ‘Canada Says Burma Invited Controversial Tycoon on Trade Tour’; 30 June 2014, http://www.
irrawaddy.org/burma/canada-says-burma-invited-controversial-tycoon-trade-tour.html, accessed 4 September 2015. Communication from
Seamus Martov; 2015.
256. MGE, ‘Hpakant Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of end of 2012). MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade
Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of 2012). The Yadanar Taung Tann name also appears to be marked on the same Met Lin Chaung (#2) mine in the
MGE, ‘Map Showing Hpakant Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ that was in use as of end mid-2014, however the text is indistinct.
257. Global Witness interview with consultant to jade business and a businessman; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interview 236 and 168).
258. MGE, ‘Gwi Hkar Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2015).
259. DICA record for Yadanar Taung Tann Gems Co. Ltd and Dagon Yadanar Gems Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net 4 September
2015. As of October 2014, the same two directors were also the company’s sole shareholders: DICA records for Dagon Yadanar Gems Co. Ltd
extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. MGE, ‘Gwi Hkar Treasure Land and
related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2015).
260. Global Witness interview with businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 168).
261. Global Witness interview with businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 168).
262. According to 2014 emporium sales records, the Htoo Group’s Htoo International and Htoo Apyi Pyi Saing Yar (a joint venture with MG) made sales
of US$13,223,634. Htoo Group has also provided Global Witness with a breakdown of its 2014 jade sales. However, there is a discrepancy of 16 lots
which are recorded in the official emporium sales records but not in the data provided to Global Witness by Htoo Group. This discrepancy may be
due to buyers failing to complete sales agreed at the emporium. Global Witness has sought clarification from Htoo Group but has not received a
response.
263. US Embassy Rangoon, ‘The Burmese Regime’s Number One Crony: Tay Za’, Wikileaks; 3 April 2007, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/
cables/07RANGOON328_a.html, last accessed 24 April 2015. US Embassy Rangoon, ‘Tay Za’s Family Tell Their Side of the Story’, Wikileaks; 7
November 2007, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/07RANGOON1093_a.html, last accessed 24 April 2015.
264. US Department of the Treasury, ‘Treasury Action Targets Financial Network of Burmese Tycoon and Regime Henchman Tay Za’; 5 February 2008,
http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/hp807.aspx, last accessed 24 April 2015.
265. US Department of the Treasury, ‘Treasury Action Targets Financial Network of Burmese Tycoon and Regime Henchman Tay Za’; 5 February 2008,
http://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/hp807.aspx, last accessed 24 April 2015. Rieffel, L., ‘Myanmar/Burma: Inside
Challenges, Outside Interests’, Brookings Institution Press; 4 October 2010, p.41. BBC, ‘Burma’s parliament opens new session’; 31 January 2011,
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-12321085, last accessed 3 May 2015. Min Zin, ‘In Myanmar, a Soft Coup Ahead of an Election’, The
New York Times; 11 September 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/12/opinion/in-myanmar-a-soft-coup-ahead-of-an-election.html?_r=0,
last accessed 30 September 2015.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 119
266. Wikileaks, ‘Tay Za’s Family Tell Their Side of the Story’; 7 November 2007, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/07RANGOON1093_a.html, last
accessed 24 April 2015.
267. Global Witness interviews with jade businessman and corporate researcher focused on Myanmar; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 109
and 218-B).
268. Global Witness meeting with Htoo Group representatives, March 2015.
269. Global Witness interview with three jade businessman and an employee of MEHL; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6-C, 14-A, 58 and 484).
270. Global Witness field interviews in Hpakant, including interviews with members of community affected by relocation; 2014. (Global Witness interviews
135-B and 482).
271. Htoo International Industry Company & Htoo Gems and Jewellery Company, ‘Presentation on Jade Mining Operations’, 13 March 2015. Letter from
Kyauk Seinn Nagar (Gems) Co., Ltd to Global Witness dated 25 July 2015.
272. Global Witness, ‘A Conflict of Interests – The Uncertain Future of Burma’s Forests’; 2003, page 93, https://www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/
files/import/03sep3%20Conflict%20of%20Interests90-127.pdf, last accessed 21 May 2015.
273. Communication from Tom Kramer; 2015. Global Witness interview with international expert on Myanmar’s narcotics industry; 2015. (Global Witness
interview 296-A).
274. Global Witness interviews with a businessman, a humanitarian worker, Kachin politicians and five jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Wit-
ness interviews 187, 202-C, 8, 9, 263, 218-B, 205-B, 377-B and 135-C). The UWSA/UWSP is the largest and most well-equipped non-state armed
group in Myanmar, with an estimated 20,000-30,000 regular troops and up to 50,000 reserves. Bertil Lintner / The Irrawaddy, ‘Who are the Wa?’;
2 June 2014, http://www.irrawaddy.org/magazine/wa.html, last accessed 15 September 2015. Tom Kramer, Transnational Institute, ‘Neither War
nor Peace: The Future of the Ceasefire Agreements in Burma’; July 2009, p.16, http://www.tni.org/files/download/ceasefire.pdf, last accessed 16
April 2015. Burma News International, ‘Deciphering Myanmar’s Peace Process: A Reference Guide, 2014’; March 2014, http://mmpeacemonitor.
org/images/pdf/deciphering_myanmar_peace_process_2014.pdf, last accessed 1 March 2015. Ashley South, ‘Ethnic Politics in Burma: States of
Conflict’, Routledge Contemporary Series; 2008, Chapter 5.
275. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 135).
276. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interview 310 and 377-B). Bertil Lintner & Michael Black,
‘Merchants of Madness: The Methamphetamine Explosion in the Golden Triangle’, Silkworm Books; 2009, p.118.
277. Letter to Global Witness from Li Myint and Kyaw Kyaw Oo; 2015. DICA record for Hong Pang Mining Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Construction Co. Ltd,
Hong Pang Textile Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Electronic Industry Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Livestock Co. Ltd and Hong Pang General Trading Co. Ltd, extracted
by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. For references to US Sanctions see US Treasury,
‘Recent OFAC Actions’; 13 November 2008, http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20081113.aspx, last
accessed 7 May 2015.
278. Detail of the evidence supporting these findings is set out in the accompanying background paper on UWSA/UWSP companies.
279. Global Witness interviews with a KIA/KIO representative, two international experts on Myanmar’s narcotics industry, two former jade businessmen
and four jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 259, 260, 296, 310, 382, 383, 481, 377-B and 14-H). Letter to Global Witness
from Li Myint and Kyaw Kyaw Oo; 2015. Communication from international expert on Myanmar’s narcotics industry; 2015. DICA records for three
Apho Tan San Chain Hmi / Value Standard companies: Value Standard Dairg Products Co. Ltd; Value Standard General Trading Co. Ltd and Value
Standard Food Industrial Co. Ltd; also Myanmar Takaung Gems Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Mining Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Construction Co. Ltd, Hong Pang
Textile Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Electronic Industry Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Livestock Co. Ltd, Hong Pang General Trading Co. Ltd, Thaw Tar Win Gems &
Jewellery Co. Ltd, Thaw Tar Win Trading Co. Ltd, Thaw Tar Win Construction Co. Ltd, Moe Let Aung Construction Co. Ltd and Shwe Pyae Sone Tun
Transportation Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. DICA records
for three Apho Tan San Chain Hmi / Value Standard companies: Value Standard Dairg Products Co. Ltd; Value Standard General Trading Co. Ltd
and Value Standard Food Industrial Co. Ltd; also Myanmar Takaung Gems Co. Ltd, Ayeyar Yadanar Gems & Jewellery Co. Ltd, Thaw Tar Win Gems
& Jewellery Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net; 5-7 August 2015. MGE, ‘Mining Blocks Owned by Myanmar Takaung Company’.
Communication from MGE; 2015. Bertil Lintner & Michael Black, ‘Merchants of Madness: The Methamphetamine Explosion in the Golden
Triangle’, Silkworm Books; 2009, p.99.
280. MGE, ‘Mining Blocks Owned by Myanmar Takaung Company’. Global Witness interviews with a jade industry expert group, a jade businessmen,
two Myanmar Takaung employees; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6-C, 43, 242 and 347). Letter to Global Witness from Li Myint and
Kyaw Kyaw Oo; 2015.
281. Global Witness interviews with two international experts on Myanmar’s narcotics industry, three jade businessmen and an ethnic armed group
leader; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 296-B, 296-C, 303, 218-C, 310, 377, 473).
282. Global Witness interviews with six jade businessmen and a KIA/KIO representative; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6, 218-B, 135, 377-
B, 487, 434 and 259).
283. Global Witness interviews with six jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 65, 14-D, 117, 187, 177-B and 6-C). Communication
from international expert on Myanmar’s Narcotics Industry; 2015. DICA records for Myanmar Takaung Gems Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Mining Co. Ltd,
Hong Pang Construction Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Textile Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Electronic Industry Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Livestock Co. Ltd and Hong Pang
General Trading Co. Ltd, extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015. DICA records
for Myanmar Takaung Gems Co. Ltd, retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net; 5 August 2015. MGE, ‘Mining Blocks Owned by Myanmar
Takaung Company’ states that Zaw Bo Khant is a representative of Thaw Tar Win Gems and Apho Tan San Chain Hmi Gems. A written communication
from MGE lists Zaw Bo Khant as responsible for Thaw Tar Win Gems’ mining blocks in Hpakant. Letter to Global Witness from Li Myint and Kyaw
Kyaw Oo; 2015.
284. Communication from international expert on Myanmar’s Narcotics Industry; 2015. Global Witness meeting with Zaw Bo Khant; 2015. Bertil
Lintner & Michael Black, ‘Merchants of Madness: The Methamphetamine Explosion in the Golden Triangle’, Silkworm Books; 2009, p.99. Letter
to Global Witness from Li Myint and Kyaw Kyaw Oo; 2015. DICA record for Hong Pang Mining Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Construction Co. Ltd, Hong Pang
Textile Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Electronic Industry Co. Ltd, Hong Pang Livestock Co. Ltd and Hong Pang General Trading Co. Ltd, extracted by Open-
Corporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015.
285. US Treasury, ‘Recent OFAC Actions’; 13 November 2008, http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20081113.
aspx, last accessed 15 September 2015.
286. This comment was made by a Myanmar Takaung representative to a jade businessman whom Global Witness later interviewed; 2015. (Global
Witness interview 250).
287. MGE, ‘Mining Blocks Owned by Myanmar Takaung Company’.

120 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
288. Global Witness interview with a political analyst, KIA/KIO officials, a jade mine worker, two jade businessman and a civil society organisation; 2014
and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 18, 24, 177-B, 197-D, 218-B and 295).
289. Global Witness interviews with a businessman, a jade company staff member and two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 24,
416, 248 and 250).
290. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 65-J).
291. Global Witness interviews with local official and a jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 52 and 65-E). Eleven Media, ‘Many buried
in jade mine landslide’; 8 March 2015. http://www.elevenmyanmar.com/local/many-buried-jade-mine-landslide, last accessed 11 May 2015.
Reuters, ‘Rockslide at Burma Jade Mine Kills 9, Around 20 Missing’; 1 October 2015, http://www.irrawaddy.org/burma/rockslide-at-burma-jade-
mine-kills-9-around-20-missing.html, last accessed 1 October 2015.
292. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015.
293. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015.
294. Global Witness interviews with three jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 218-C, 6-C, and 135-C).
295. Global Witness interview with a jade businessman; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interview 218-B).
296. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015.
297. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015.
298. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 397-A).
299. Martin Smith, ‘Burma in Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity’, Zed Books Ltd; 1999, p.339. Tom Kramer, ‘Neither War Nor Peace: The Future of
the Cease-fire Agreements in Burma’, Transnational Institute, pp.14 and 27; July 2009, https://www.tni.org/files/download/ceasefire.pdf, last accessed 1
October 2015. According to a letter from Ruby Dragon Group to Global Witness, the group began business in 1992 in the wake of the 1991 ceasefire
negotiated with the Pa-O National Organisation, and following a peace agreement. According to the 2013 version of the Ruby Dragon Group’s
website, by 2002, it had been awarded 71 gemstone blocks in Shan State and 66 gemstone blocks in Kachin State. The 2013 version of the website,
www.rubydragongroupcompanies.com (which is referenced on Ruby Dragon Group business cards) is accessible via website archive, the Way
Back Machine, at http://web.archive.org/web/20130725033738/http://www.rubydragoncompanies.com/; last accessed 14 April 2015. See also The
New Light of Myanmar, ‘Secretary-1 addresses ceremony to donate over 3,000 tons Massive Jade Dyke to the State’; 26 May 2002.
300. Letter from Ruby Dragon Group to Global Witness confirming that it began mining operations in Hpakant in May 1997, and has operated in
partnership with the Ministry of Mines since 2000 [translated from Myanmar language into English by Global Witness]. Global Witness interview
with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 218-B). The New Light of Myanmar, ‘Secretary-1 addresses ceremony to donate over
3,000 tons Massive Jade Dyke to the State’; 26 May 2002.
301. During the 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 tax years, Ruby Dragon Group’s gemstone and cement companies have both featured in Myanmar’s top 500
tax payer lists with Dragon Cement paying over 200 million kyat in commercial tax in 2013-2014. See Myanmar Ministry of Finance, ‘List of Top
(500) Commercial Tax Payers for 2012-2013’. Myanmar Ministry of Finance, ‘Top 1000 Myanmar Business Owners paying Income Tax for the year
of 2013-2014’. Myanmar Ministry of Finance, ‘Top 1000 Myanmar Business Owners/Companies Paying 2013-14 Commercial Tax’. According to
Ruby Dragon Group business cards provided to Global Witness in April 2014, the Ruby Dragon Group has interests in sectors including gemstones,
gold and antimony mining, cement manufacturing, hotels, agriculture, food and wine.
302. MGE official sales figures for 2013 and 2014.
303. Letter from Ruby Dragon Group to Global Witness; 2015.
304. The New Light of Myanmar, ‘Secretary-1 addresses ceremony to donate over 3,000 tons Massive Jade Dyke to the State’, 26 May 2002. The New
Light of Myanmar, ‘The Union of Myanmar, Union Election Commission, Nay Pyi Taw, Notification No. 119/2010’; 8 November 2010. Letter from
Ruby Dragon Group to Global Witness; 2015.
305. In the 2010 elections, San Lwin ran unopposed on behalf of the PNO for the Hopong Township (2) constituency, in the capital of the Pa-O
Self-Administered Zone. He was then elected as Chairman of the Zone. The New Light of Myanmar, ‘The Union of Myanmar, Union Election
Commission, Nay Pyi Taw, Notification No. 120/2010’; 8 November 2010. The New Light of Myanmar, ‘Regular sessions of first Region and State
Hluttaws go on. Approval sought for nomination of Advocate-General, Auditor-General of Regions or States. Nominations of executive committee
members of Leading Bodies of Self-Administered Division and Self-Administered Zone approved’, 8 February 2011. Lwin, S, Myanmar Times,
‘New self-administered areas struggle to assert authority’; 17 February 2011, http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/national-news/9589-new-
self-administered-areas-struggle-to-assert-authority.html, last accessed 1 October 2015. In 2014, San Lwin and Nay Win Tun were both listed
as directors of Kokar Joker Mate Thahar Tours Co., Ltd, and each had directorships of companies in the Golden Island Cottages Group. 2014
company records taken from DICA, as extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March
2015. Khun Thein Pe business connections to Nay Win Tun: In the 2010 elections, Khun Thein Pe ran unopposed as the PNO candidate for
Hopong constituency. In 2014, a Khun Thein Pe, with the same NRC number, was listed as a director of Golden Island Cottages Hotel Group Co.,
Ltd. A Nay Win Soe/Nay Win Htun, with a NRC number matching that listed against Nay Win Tun in the 2010 election notice is a director of the
same company. For parliamentary notices, see The New Light of Myanmar, ‘The Union of Myanmar, Union Election Commission, Nay Pyi Taw,
Notification No. 119/2010’; 8 November 2010. Golden Island Cottages Hotel Group Co. Ltd. directorships taken from DICA records extracted by
OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015.
306. Letter from Ruby Dragon Group to Global Witness confirming that Nay Win Tun chaired the Amyotha Hluttaw natural resources committee responsible
for reviewing Myanmar’s mining and gemstones for two consecutive terms in 2012 and 2013. From 18 July 2014, Nay Win Tun was a member (but
not the chair) of the committee.
307. The New Light of Myanmar, ‘Secretary-1 addresses ceremony to donate over 3,000 tonnes Massive Jade Dyke to the State’, 26 May 2002.
308. See 2013 version of the website, www.rubydragongroupcompanies.com (which is referenced on Ruby Dragon Group business cards), accessible
via website archive, the Way Back Machine, at http://web.archive.org/web/20130725033738/http://www.rubydragoncompanies.com/; last accessed
1 October 2015.
309. The New Light of Myanmar, ‘Secretary-1 addresses ceremony to donate over 3,000 tons Massive Jade Dyke to the State’, 26 May 2002. Letter from
Ruby Dragon Chairman to Global Witness; 2015.
310. The New Light of Myanmar, ‘Secretary-1 addresses ceremony to donate over 3,000 tons Massive Jade Dyke to the State’, 26 May 2002.
311. Communication from US Campaign on Burma; 2015. Global Witness meeting with Coca-Cola; 2015.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 121
312. Global Witness meeting with Daw Shwe Cynn and U Chaow; 2015. DICA record for Xie Family Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net;
8 December 2014 (this DICA record, which has a breakdown of shareholdings, is no longer available online). Coca-Cola letter to Global Witness;
August 2015.
313. MGE, ‘Gwi Hkar Treasure Land and related blocks’ map (in use as of mid-2015).
314. Global Witness interviews with industry association representative and a jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 488 and 489). The
Founder / Sina Daily, ‘Jade Smuggling in Burma’; 23 September 2012, http://style.sina.com.cn/news/b/2012-09-23/0942105939.shtml, last ac-
cessed 14 August 2015. Pingzhou Jade, ‘Holding of grand Chinese jewellery industry Summit Forum’; 18 May 2013, http://www.pzyq.org/Consult-
ing_list.asp?id=746, last accessed 14 August 2015. Ting Zhang / Chinese Jade, ‘Customs increased quoted price, caused thousands of tonnes of
Pingzhou Jade to be stranded at Hong Kong port’; 1 November 2010, http://feicui168.com/feicuixinwen/news62243.html, last accessed 14 August
2015. Pingzhou Jade, ‘Pingzhou Jade and Jewellery Association holding half year work reporting along with the election of all the board of directors,
board of supervisory members and representatives’; 29 August 2011, http://www.pzyq.org/Association/news_list.asp?id=335, last accessed 14
August 2015. Judicial Opinions of China, ‘Written sentence of second instance for Liupei, Ye, Zhikang, Liu and Liao, Chen’s crime of smuggling
goods and articles’; 4 June 2015, http://www.court.gov.cn/zgcpwsw/gd/xs/201506/t20150604_8418713.htm, last accessed 14 August 2015.
315. US Treasury, ‘SDN List by Country’, http://www.treasury.gov/ofac/downloads/ctrylst.txt, last accessed 14 August 2015.
316. Global Witness meeting with Daw Shwe Cynn and U Chaow; 2015.
317. MEHL, ‘Twelfth Annual Report of the Year 2001-2002’; 3 June 2002, reproduced in Sein Htay/Federation of Trade Unions-Burma, ‘Economic
Report on Burma 2004/05’, Annex 3; 2005, http://www.burmalibrary.org/docs12/FTUB-Economic-Report-Sein_Htay2004-05-red.pdf, last accessed
28 September 2015.
318. MEHL, ‘Twelfth Annual Report of the Year 2001-2002’; 3 June 2002, reproduced in Sein Htay / Federation of Trade Unions-Burma, ‘Economic
Report on Burma 2004/05’, Annex 3; 2005, http://www.burmalibrary.org/docs12/FTUB-Economic-Report-Sein_Htay2004-05-red.pdf, last accessed
28 September 2015. Global Witness has asked an expert on the activities of MEHL to review this document and they have stated they believe it to
be authentic.
319. MEHL, ‘Financial Year 2007-2008 Annual Report’, cited in US Embassy Rangoon, ‘Burma: State-owned Enterprise Demonstrates Military’s Hold
on Economy’; 6 February 2009, https://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/09RANGOON83_a.html, last accessed 20 April 2015.
320. Global Witness meeting with MEHL; 2015. Global Witness meeting with Daw Shwe Cynn and U Chaow; 2015.
321. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2014.
322. MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone Khin Treasure Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of mid-2014). MGE, ‘Map Showing Lone Khin Treasure
Land Joint Venture Jade Mining Blocks’ (in use as of end of 2012).
323. Global Witness meeting with Daw Shwe Cynn and U Chaow; 2015.
324. Coca-Cola letter to Global Witness; August 2015. The Coca-Cola Company Myanmar, ‘Responsible Investment in Myanmar 2015 Update’; 30 June
2015, p.14, http://photos.state.gov/libraries/burma/895/pdf/20150630TCCCMyanmarDueDiligenceReport.pdf, last accessed 9 July 2015.
325. Coca-Cola letter to Global Witness; August 2015.
326. Coca-Cola letter to Global Witness; August 2015.
327. Global Witness meeting with Daw Shwe Cynn and U Chaow; 2015. DICA record for Xie Family Co. Ltd retrieved from http://dica.gov.mm.x-aas.net;
8 December 2014 (this DICA record, which has a breakdown of shareholdings, is no longer available online).
328. Melanie Keyte / Democratic Voice of Burma, ‘Burma: Coca-Cola Hits Back At Military Link Claims’; 3 July 2015.
329. Coca-Cola, ‘A History of Coca-Cola Advertising Slogans’; 1 January 2012, http://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/coke-lore-slogans, last
accessed 9 July 2015.
330. MSP CAT Company Overview, http://www.mspcat.com.mm/2012-10-29-04-46-47/1company-overview.html, last accessed 14 August 2015. DICA
records for Myan Shwe Pyi Mining Co. Ltd and Myan Shwe Pyi Tractors Co. Ltd extracted by OpenCorporates; October 2014 and analysed by the
Open Knowledge Foundation; March 2015.
331. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘Family and Relationships: Family Members’, Facebook. Aung Thu Ko, ‘Work and Education: Work’, Facebook; https://www.face-
book.com/aung.t.ko.5/about?section=education&pnref=about, last accessed 14 August 2015.
332. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘Album: Austrial Trip [sic] (25.09.11-01.10.11’, Facebook; 2 October 2011, https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=122023644568
234&set=a.122018287902103.18257.100002817985172&type=3&theater, last accessed 14 August 2015.
333. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘Wheel loader 992, caterpillar at demo, spain’, Facebook; 13 September 2013, https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=4174676
18357167&set=a.334142283356368.65483.100002817985172&type=3&theater, last accessed 14 August 2015.
334. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘At articulated truck demo ground, peterlie, Newcastle, England’, Facebook, 9 September 2013; https://www.facebook.com/photo.
php?fbid=416346311802631&set=a.334142283356368.65483.100002817985172&type=3&theater, last accessed 14 August 2015.
335. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘cat office, Germany’, Facebook; 11 September 2013, https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=416783348425594&set=a.3341422
83356368.65483.100002817985172&type=3&theater, last accessed 14 August 2015.
336. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘Caterpillar’, Facebook; 16 September 2013 https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=418522828251646&set=a.334142283356368
.65483.100002817985172&type=3&permPage=1, last accessed 14 August 2015.
337. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘Album: Austrial Trip [sic] (25.09.11-01.10.11’, Facebook; 2 October 2011, https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=12202183456
8415&set=a.122018287902103.18257.100002817985172&type=3&permPage=1, last accessed 14 August 2015. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘golf’, Facebook, 14
September 2013, https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=417719048332024&set=a.334142283356368.65483.100002817985172&type=3&perm
Page=1, last accessed 14 August 2005. Zaw Bo Khant, ‘Eiffel Tower .,, champagne …’, Facebook; 19 September 2013, https://www.facebook.com/
photo.php?fbid=419641164806479&set=a.334142283356368.65483.100002817985172&type=3&permPage=1, last accessed 14 August 2015. Zaw
Bo Khant, ‘ … Rolex … euro 39050’, Facebook; 19 September 2013, https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=419400904830505&set=a.33414228
3356368.65483.100002817985172&type=3&permPage=1, last accessed 14 August 2015.
338. Letter from Caterpillar Inc. to Global Witness dated 17 July 2015. Caterpillar Inc.’s Code of Conduct is available at http://s7d2.scene7.com/is/con-
tent/Caterpillar/C10398712.
339. Letter from Caterpillar Inc. to Global Witness dated 17 July 2015.

122 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
340. Letter from Caterpillar Inc. to Global Witness dated 17 July 2015.
341. Letter from Caterpillar Inc. to Global Witness dated 17 July 2015.
342. See for example Bertil Lintner & Michael Black, ‘Merchants of Madness: The Methamphetamine Explosion in the Golden Triangle’, Silkworm
Books; 2009, p.99.
343. As the US Administration eased sanctions on Myanmar, it put in place new reporting requirements for US companies investing US$500,000 or
more in the country. Under these rules, which took effect in 2013, US companies that fall into this category are required to report annually on
their Myanmar operations, providing details including an overview of their business activities, information on their anti-corruption and human
rights policies, and any corruption or human rights risks identified together with actions taken to address these risks. For further details, see:
Embassy of the United States in Rangoon, Burma, ‘Reporting Requirements’; http://burma.usembassy.gov/reporting-requirements.html, last
accessed 1 July 2015. At the time of writing, Caterpillar Inc. has not filed a report for 2013, 2014 or 2015. In May 2015, a group of institutional
investors wrote a joint letter to non-complying companies, including Caterpillar Inc., urging them to submit timely and comprehensive reports
in line with the US rules. Conflict Risk Network, ‘Investors call for robust corporate reporting on Burma/Myanmar’, 24 June 2015; https://www.
linkedin.com/company/zevin-asset-management-zam-, last accessed 5 July 2015.
344. Global Witness telephone conversation with Caterpillar Inc. on 14 July 2015.
345. Letter to Global Witness from Caterpillar Inc. dated 17 July 2015.
346. For full copy of letter to President Thein Sein dated 2 October 2014, please see https://www.globalwitness.org/campaigns/myanmar/.
347. Communication from KDNG; 2015.
348. Global Witness interview with Kachin businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 135-A).
349. Global Witness interviews with church leader, a KIA/KIO representative and a jade businessman; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 286,
130-B, and 139-B).
350. Global Witness interview with Kachin church leader; 2014. (Global Witness interview 139-B).
351. KDNG interview with former jade trader; 2015. (KDNG interview 31).
352. Global Witness interviews with Kachin community leaders and KDNG interviews with residents of Hpakant; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 243-
C and 239-A, KDNG interview 18-E).
353. Over the past 20 years, the government has passed a series of regulations which restrict rights to holding, selling or transporting jade, with the
result that the possession of jade by Kachins is, in most cases, a criminal act. These regulations include: Ministry of Mines Order 11/97, ‘List of
border towns where the trade in gemstones is banned’, 4 December 1997; Ministry of Mines Order 19/2000, ‘Designation of specific routes for
transport of raw jade stones’, 9 March 2000; ‘Kachin State Peace and Development Council Local Order No.1/2000’, 25 March 2000; Ministry of
Mines, ‘Regulations on transporting of raw jade stones’, 9 March 2003; Ministry of Mines, ‘Designation of areas where raw jade stones can be
legally carried’, 7 October 2007’; Ministry of Mines, ‘Designation of areas where raw jade stones can be legally carried’, 22 May 2012.
354. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 142-A).
355. Global Witness interviews with four jade businessmen; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 135, 136, 240 and 377).
356. Global Witness interview with Kachin community leader; 2014. (Global Witness interview 239-C).
357. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 135-E).
358. Global Witness interview with Kachin community leader; 2014. (Global Witness interview 239-C).
359. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6-C and 65).
360. Kachin State is home to a range of ethnic groups, notably ethnic Kachins who make up an estimated 38.1% of the 1.7 million population; as well
as Bamar and Shan who account for, respectively, an estimated 29.3% and 24.2%; as well as many other smaller groups. UNDP, ‘The State
of Local Governance: Trends in Kachin’; 2015; http://www.mm.undp.org/content/dam/myanmar/docs/Publications/PovRedu/Local%20Gover-
nance%20Mapping/UNDP_MM_State_of_Local_Governance_Kachin_ENG.pdf, last accessed 15 August 2015.
361. Global Witness with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 332).
362. Global Witness interview with local resident who worked in the jade business until a decade ago; 2014. (Global Witness interview 243-C).
363. Global Witness and KDNG interviews with current and former jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 8, 9, 332, 239-C and
136-E. KDNG interview 35). The Irrawaddy, ‘Floods Displace Over 1,000 People in Hpakant’; 25 August 2015, http://www.irrawaddy.org/burma/
floods-displace-1000-people-hpakant.html, last accessed 5 October 2015. Eleven Media, ‘Jade firms blamed for floods in Hpakant region’; 18
August 2014, http://www.euro-burma.eu/news/show/1524/, last accessed 5 October 2014. Aung Hein Min / Eleven Media, ‘Local residents of
Hpakant town and surrounding villages worried about flooding in the rainy season due to soil dumping into Ever Lake by jade companies’ seven
tracts’; 2 May 2015 [translated from Myanmar language to English by Global Witness].
364. KDNG interview with local resident; 2015. (KDNG interview 46).
365. Film footage provided by local resident; 2015. Footage of the same incident (which does not identify the site as a Myat Yamon mine) can also be
accessed at Radio Free Asia, ‘Unbridled Jade Mining Triggers Deadly Landslides in Myanmar’, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rWd1PSluDe0,
last accessed 5 October 2015. Global Witness interviews with jade businessman and local residents; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 404
and 128-G). Xinhua, ‘Nearly 70 missing in landslide in Myanmar’s jade mining area’; 9 April 2015, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-
04/09/c_134138004.htm, last accessed 5 October 2015.
366. Global Witness interviews with local residents; 2015. (Global Witness interviews collectively referenced as 128-G).
367. KDNG interviews with accident victims, victims’ families and with local residents; 2015. (KDNG interviews referenced collectively as 18-M). KDNG
interviews with the families of accident victims, victims’ families and with local residents, together with photographs of incidents; 2015. (KDNG
interviews collectively referenced as 18-J).
368. Global Witness interview with local resident; 2015. (Global Witness interview 33). KDNG interview with local resident; 2015. (KDNG interview 35).
369. KDNG interview with church leader; 2015. (KDNG interview 38).
370. KDNG interviews with local residents and with jade businessman; 2015 (KDNG interview 35, 39, 40, 41, 50 and 53).

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 123
371. KDNG interview with local resident; 2014. (KDNG interview 53).
372. Global Witness interviews with jade company employee and with Kachin church leader; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 72 and 139-B). Andrew
RC Marshall and Min Zayar Oo / Reuters, ‘Myanmar’s old guard runs a jade empire’; 29 September 2013, http://graphics.thomsonreuters.
com/13/09/MYANMAR-JADE.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015. Dan Levin / The New York Times, ‘Searching for Burmese Jade, and Finding
Misery’, 1 December 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/02/world/searching-for-burmese-jade-and-finding-misery.html?_r=0, last accessed
4 October 2015.
373. Global Witness interviews with community leader and local resident; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 322 and 428). Global Witness interview with
journalist; 2015. (Global Witness interview 410).
374. Global Witness interview with ethnic Rakhine miners who said they now numbered 150,000 in Hpakant and interviews with local residents, a KIA/
KIO representative and a jade miner; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 259, 492, 63 and 68).
375. Global Witness interview with yemase collector; 2014. (Global Witness interview 336). The other quotes and comments in this box come from the
same source unless indicated otherwise.
376. Lawi Weng, Irrawaddy, ‘Villagers to protest over grisly death of Kachin jade picker’; 18 November 2014, http://www.irrawaddy.org/burma/villag-
ers-protest-grisly-death-kachin-jade-picker.html, last accessed 2 October 2015. Eleven Media Group, ‘Kachin protesters demand slice of mining
wealth’; 22 November 2014, http://www.kdng.org/news/34-news/430-kachin-protesters-demand-slice-of-mining-wealth.html, last accessed 2
October 2015.
377. KDNG interviews with local community and Global Witness interview with Kachin community leader; 2014. (KDNG interviews collectively refer-
enced as 19-D and Global Witness interview 243-C).
378. Eleven Media Group, ‘Kachin protesters demand slice of mining wealth’; 22 November 2014, http://www.kdng.org/news/34-news/430-kachin-
protesters-demand-slice-of-mining-wealth.html, last accessed 2 October 2015.
379. Global Witness interview with small-scale jade businessman, 2014. (Global Witness interview 135-F).
380. Quoted in Transnational Institute / Burma Centrum Nederland, ‘The Kachin Crisis: Peace Must Prevail’; March 2013, p.13, http://www.tni.org/
sites/www.tni.org/files/download/bpb10.pdf, last downloaded 4 October 2015, and on a range of blog sites, e.g. https://www.xing.com/communi-
ties/posts/oliver-massmann-myanmar-news-and-regulations-1004093807 and http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_63ec24f50102ek1r.html, both last
accessed 4 October 2015. The original news article in which this comment was first reported appears no longer to be available online.
381. Global Witness interviews with humanitarian worker and a journalist; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 202-B and 89-B). Yun Sun / Stimson Cen-
ter, ‘China, the United States and the Kachin Conflict’; 2014, p.4, http://www.stimson.org/images/uploads/research-pdfs/Myanmar_Issue_Brief_
No_2_Jan_2014_WEB_3.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015.
382. Human Rights Watch, ‘Untold Miseries: Wartime Abuses and Forced Displacement in Burma’s Kachin State’, Chapter 2; March, 2012, http://www.
hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/burma0312ForUpload_1.pdf, last accessed 9 August 2015.
383. Fortify Rights, ‘I thought they would kill me’, Chapters II, III and IV; June 2014, www.fortifyrights.org, last accessed 9 August 2015.
384. See for example Jenny Hedström, ‘Gender and Myanmar’s Kachin conflict’, New Mandala; 27 July 2015, http://asiapacific.anu.edu.au/newman-
dala/2015/07/27/gender-and-myanmars-kachin-conflict, last accessed 9 August 2015. Women’s League of Burma (WLB), ‘Same Impunity, Same
Patterns – Sexual Abuses by the Burma Army Will Not Stop Until There Is a Genuine Civilian Government’, pp.14-15; January 2014, http://wom-
enofburma.org/same-impunity-same-pattern-report-of-systematic-sexual-violence-in-burmas-ethnic-areas, last accessed 4 October 2015.
385. Global Witness interview with humanitarian worker; 2015. (Global Witness interview 202). Report on security situation in Hpakant from a confidential
source; 2015.
386. Mandy Sadan, ‘Being and Becoming Kachin’, the British Academy / Oxford University Press, 2013, Chapters 6 and 7. Carine Jaquet, ‘The Kachin
Conflict – Testing the Limits of the Political Transition in Myanmar’, IRASEC; 2015, pp. 22-25 and Chapter 2, http://www.ifre.fr/c/35429, last
accessed 1 September 2015.
387. Global Witness interview with local official and with Kachin politicians; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 8, 9 and 45). Letter from the
KIA/KIO to Global Witness; 2015. Kevin Woods, ‘Ceasefire capitalism: military–private partnerships, resource concessions and military–state
building in the Burma–China borderlands’, Journal of Peasant Studies, 38:4; 2011, p. 750. Thant Myint-U, ‘Where China Meets India – Burma and
the New Crossroads of Asia’; 2011, Farrar Strauss and Giroux, p. 96. Bertil Lintner, ‘Land of Jade’, Orchid Press; 2011 (first published 1989), p.
164. Global Witness, ‘A Conflict of Interests – The Uncertain Future of Burma’s Forests’; 2003, p. 93, https://www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/
files/import/03sep3%20Conflict%20of%20Interests90-127.pdf, last accessed 2 September 2015.
388. Global Witness interview with Kachin politician and KIA/KIO representatives; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 474 and 474). Communication from
Bertil Lintner; 2015. Global Witness, ‘A Conflict of Interests – The Uncertain Future of Burma’s Forests’; 2003, p. 93, https://www.globalwitness.
org/sites/default/files/import/03sep3%20Conflict%20of%20Interests90-127.pdf, last accessed 2 September 2015.
389. Global Witness interviews with Kachin politician and KIA/KIO staff; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 387 and 388). Communication from Bertil
Lintner; 2015.
390. Global Witness interview with church leader; 2014. (Global Witness interview 139-B). Tom Kramer, ‘The United Wa State Party: Narco-Army or
Ethnic Nationalist Party?’, Institute for Southeast Asian Studies; 2007, p. 43. Global Witness, ‘A Conflict of Interests – The Uncertain Future of
Burma’s Forests’; 2003, p. 93, https://www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/files/import/03sep3%20Conflict%20of%20Interests90-127.pdf, last
accessed 31 August 2015.
391. Global Witness interviews with civil society representative and a jade businessman; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 185 and 54). Kevin
Woods, ‘Ceasefire capitalism: military–private partnerships, resource concessions and military–state building in the Burma–China borderlands’,
Journal of Peasant Studies, 38:4; 2011, pp. 756-757. Global Witness, ‘A Choice for China – Ending the Destruction of Burma’s Northern Frontier
Forests’; 2005, p. 57, https://www.globalwitness.org/archive/choice-china-ending-destruction-burmas-frontier-forests, last accessed 31 August
2015.
392. Global Witness interviews with church leader, a civic leader, a civil society representative and a political analyst; 2014 (Global Witness interviews
139-B, 10-B, 145-A and 197-B). Global Witness, ‘A Choice for China – Ending the Destruction of Burma’s Northern Frontier Forests’; 2005, p. 8,
https://www.globalwitness.org/archive/choice-china-ending-destruction-burmas-frontier-forests, last accessed 31 August 2015. International
Crisis Group, ‘A Tentative Peace in Myanmar’s Kachin Conflict’; June 2013, p. 5, http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/asia/south-east-asia/
burma-myanmar/b140-a-tentative-peace-in-myanmars-kachin-conflict.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015.
393. Yun Sun / Stimson Center, ‘China, the United States and the Kachin Conflict’; 2014, p.4, http://www.stimson.org/images/uploads/research-pdfs/
Myanmar_Issue_Brief_No_2_Jan_2014_WEB_3.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015. International Crisis Group, ‘A Tentative Peace in Myanmar’s
Kachin Conflict’; June 2013, pp. 6-7, http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/asia/south-east-asia/burma-myanmar/b140-a-tentative-peace-
in-myanmars-kachin-conflict.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015. Transnational Institute / Burma Centrum Nederland, ‘The Kachin Crisis: Peace
Must Prevail’; March 2013, p.5, http://www.tni.org/sites/www.tni.org/files/download/bpb10.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015.

124 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
394. Global Witness interviews with political analyst and a KIA/KIO official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 197 and 130-B). International Crisis Group,
‘A Tentative Peace in Myanmar’s Kachin Conflict’; June 2013, pp. 5-7, http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/asia/south-east-asia/burma-
myanmar/b140-a-tentative-peace-in-myanmars-kachin-conflict.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015.
395. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 14-E).
396. References for points in this paragraph are set out in Chapter 2.
397. Global Witness interview with KIA/KIO officials; 2015. (Global Witness interview 395-398) International Crisis Group, ‘Myanmar: the politics of
economic reform’,
398. Asia Report N°231; July 2012, pp. 11 and 12, http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/files/asia/south-east-asia/burma-myanmar/231-myanmar-the-
politics-of-economic-reform.pdf, last accessed 4 October 2015.
399. Global Witness interviews with former official and four jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 256-B, 14, 135-B, 6-A and 218-B).
400. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen, three KIA/KIO officials, a journalist and one local researcher; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 130-B, 261, 313, 337-E, 404, 475 and 476).
401. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 377-B).
402. Global Witness interviews with seven jade businessmen, local residents and a community leader; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 48,
49, 51, 65, 67, 68, 176, 218, 377-C).
403. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 218-B and 377-B).
404. Global Witness interviews with a Tatmadaw officer, a KIA/KIO representative, a civil society representative, a local politician, a church representative,
a group of jade businessmen and four individual jade businessmen; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 14, 140, 218-B, 234, 243, 259, 350,
353, 377, 479 and 490).
405. The data in this map is based on interviews with seven jade businessmen and one civil society representative; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 47, 101, 142, 234, 350, 352, 353 and 377).
406. Global Witness interview with a Tatmadaw officer and three jade businessmen; 2014. (Global Witness interviews, 479, 14-B, 263, 142-C).
407. Global Witness interview with jade businessman, a humanitarian worker and a civil society representative; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews
234, 142-B and 202-B).
408. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2014. (Global Witness interview 142-C and 377-A).
409. Global Witness interview with humanitarian worker; 2014. (Global Witness interview 202-C).
410. Global Witness interview with civil society representative; 2014. (Global Witness interview 234).
411. Global Witness interview with humanitarian worker; 2014. (Global Witness interview 202-B).
412. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview, 404).
413. Global Witness interviews with KIA/KIO officials; 2014. (Global Witness interview 66).
414. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessmen; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 65 and 67).
415. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 65).
416. Global Witness interview with KIA/KIO official; 2002.
417. Letter from the KIA/KIO; 2015.
418. Global Witness interviews with KIA/KIO officials and a community leader; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 52 and 66).
419. Global Witness interview with a jade businessman who gave the specific figures; 2014. (Global Witness interview 2). Supporting information on
the taxation by the KIA/KIO: Letter from the KIA/KIO; 2015 and Global Witness interviews with KIA/KIO officials and a local politician; 2014. (Global
Witness interviews 66 and 239-C).
420. Global Witness interview with political analyst who gave the specific figure and a humanitarian worker who provided more general information on
the very large sums involved; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 197-C and 202).
421. Global Witness interviews with a political analyst and a civic leader; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 197 and 134).
422. Global Witness interviews with KIA/KIO officials, a civic leader and a humanitarian worker; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 134, 202 and 395).
423. Global Witness interviews with KIA/KIO official and a jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 135 and 260).
424. ibid.
425. Letter from KIA/KIO; 2015.
426. Global Witness interview with KIA/KIO officials; 2015. (Global Witness interview 395).
427. Global Witness interviews with two jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 187 and 117).
428. Letter from KIA/KIO; 2015.
429. Global Witness interviews with two civic leaders, three jade businessman and local residents; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness interviews 6-C 10,
67, 68, 134-B and 176).
430. Global Witness interview with a group of jade businessmen, a church representative and a KIA/KIO representative; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 45, 130 and 250).
431. Global Witness interviews with jade businessman and a political analyst; 2014. (Global Witness interviews 142-C and 197-B). Communication from
KDNG; 2014.

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 125
432. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2014. (Global Witness interview 350). Letter from KIA/KIO; 2015. Communication from KDNG; 2014.
433. Global Witness interviews with former jade businessman and a researcher; 2014. (Global Witness interview 491 and 232). Dan Levin / The New
York Times, ‘Searching for Burmese Jade, and Finding Misery’, 1 December 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/02/world/searching-for-
burmese-jade-and-finding-misery.html?_r=0, last accessed 4 October 2015.
434. Global Witness interviews with a jade businessman, a former jade industry expert and a jade industry expert; 2014 and 2015. (Global Witness
interviews 11, 176 and 491).
435. Global Witness interview with jade businessman; 2015. (Global Witness interview 176).
436. Global Witness interview with former KIO official; 2014. (Global Witness interview 181).
437. ibid.
438. Global Witness obtained two data sets on historic annual production, one government-produced data-set and a second industry-produced data
set. The latter was more comprehensive, including both weight of sales and valuations of sales, and we have therefore used this data set for the
purposes of our calculations.
439. Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, Harvard Kennedy School/Proximity Designs/Rajawali Foundation Institute for Asia, ‘Creating
a Future: Using Natural Resources for New Federalism and Unity’; July 2013, http://ash.harvard.edu/links/creating-future-using-natural-re-
sources-new-federalism-and-unity, last accessed 1 August 2015.
440. A very few lines of data from the 2014 Emporium sales breakdown have been excluded because they are incomplete. They represent only a small
fraction of the total sales, and we assume that their exclusion does not have a significant impact on our calculations.
441. Industry records of the weights and values of jade emporium sales since 2005.
442. ibid.
443. Government of Myanmar, ‘Statistical Yearbook 2011’, p.237. Central Statistical Organization, ‘Production of Precious Minerals and Pearls’, 2012-
2015 data, www.csostat.gov/s2.5MA02.htm, last accessed 22 September 2015.
444. Jade businessmen, traders and a KIA/KIO official interviewed by Global Witness in Myanmar and China gave consistent accounts of companies
selling some jade at the official emporium whilst smuggling the rest directly to China. Three jade businessmen estimated that ‘big companies
smuggle at least 50% of the good jade they produce’. A prominent jade owner estimated that 60-70% goes straight to the border’, another that
‘80% of jade from Hpakant is smuggled’, an experienced jade businessman and trader that since 2011 50% of jade is typically smuggled. One
Chinese jade trader suggested that ‘80% of production is smuggled’ whilst another said that ‘outside trade is more than 5-10 times legal trade’.
A KIA/KIO official stated that 80% of jade is smuggled out and sold on the black market. Only one interviewee gave an estimate of less than half,
but he went to explain that the majority of legal sales are subject to price manipulation and tax evasion (Global Witness interviews 175/243/263-
B, 5A-AG, 6-C, 135-G, 384-A, 218, 259-260 and 411). See also Eleven, ‘Timber, jade account for more than half of smuggled goods seized’; 22
October 2014, http://www.elevenmyanmar.com/index.php?option%3Dcom_content%26view%3Darticle%26id%3D7909:timber-jade-account-
for-more-than-half-of-smuggled-goods-seized%26catid%3D44:national%26Itemid%3D384, last accessed 2 June 2015.
445. There were actually two domestic fairs in 2014. However, there is no weight data publicly available for the January 2014 sale and it was far
smaller than the October 2014 fair.
446. These recalculations are based on data on the weight and sales revenue data on the October 2014 local fair provided by the Myanmar Gems and
Jewellery Entrepreneurs Association. The January 2014 fair was a smaller event, and Global Witness has not been provided with weight and sales
revenue for this fair. We have not therefore taken account of it in our calculations.
447. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2014. MGJEA, ‘50th Myanmar Gems Emporium Report’, Appendix E: Number and Weight of Jade
Lots from 2006 June/July Special Exhibition to 50th Myanmar Gems Emporium, undated.
448. Myanmar Gems Emporium official sales figures 2014. Ministry of Mines, Myanmar Gems Emporium Central Committee, ‘Myanmar Gems Emporium
Sales (1964 to 2013)’, undated. Sales data in euros converted to U.S. dollars at exchange rate for the relevant period.
449. Global Witness interviews with jade traders, two jade businessmen and the employee of a jade company; 2015. (Global Witness interviews 124,
54-AG, 14-G and 427).
450. Chinese trade data taken from UN Comtrade Database (http://comtrade.un.org/) using HS codes: 710310 (Precious stones – rough); 710399
(Precious stones); and 722620 (Articles of precious stones). These values may include other items beside jade, but a number of Myanmar’s other
gems exports are covered by other HS codes. Diamonds are explicitly excluded from HS 710399, whilst rubies emeralds and sapphires fall within
another code (HS 710391). Given the dominance of jade in Myanmar’s production, it is likely that the vast majority of given figures for HS 710399
reflect the trade in jade. Note that missing figures indicate that Chinese customs data did not report quantity of imports from 2012 onwards for
HS 710299, likely because different measures were used in the collection of data. Sub-codes are not available through the UN Comtrade database
and it is therefore not possible to determine the exact weight per kilogram. However, export values are still reported. For 2014, Chinese import
data records were used as an additional source of trade data with Myanmar (for the same codes).
451. Global Witness interviews with MGE and with MGJEA; 2014 and 2015.
452. Letter from MGE to Global Witness.
453. It should be noted that for a very small number of lots, information was incomplete, so it is not clear whether or not they were a kyo thu. For these
lots, we have assumed that the ratio is the same as for the vast majority of the lots on which we have complete data.

126 JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET”
CREDIT: Minzayar

JADE: MYANMAR’S “BIG STATE SECRET” 127
CREDIT: Minzayar

Global Witness investigates
and campaigns to change
the system by exposing the
economic networks behind
conflict, corruption and
environmental destruction.
Global Witness is a company
limited by guarantee
and incorporated in England
(Company No. 2871809).
ISBN 978-0-9931067-6-7
Global Witness Limited
Lloyds Chambers
1 Portsoken Street
London E1 8BT
United Kingdom
mail@globalwitness.org
www.globalwitness.org
© Global Witness, 2015