Special report on the
“The ICGLR Regional Initiative against the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources
(RINR) and other Certification Mechanisms in
the Great Lakes Region:
Lessons Learned and Best practices”
Table of contents
1

© United Nations Economic Commission for Africa 2013
Sub-Regional Office for Eastern Africa
Kigali, Rwanda
www.uneca.org/sro-ea
All rights reserved.
Materials in this publication may be friendly quoted or reprinted. Acknowledgement is requested, together with
a copy of the publication. Reproduction for commercial purposes is forbidden.
Disclaimer
This report is the result of the analysis of a study commissioned by the United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa, Eastern Africa Sub-region Office (UNECASRO-EA) . However, the report does not purport to
represent the views or the official policy of the institution or of any SRO-EA member country.
2

_Toc347911670
1. INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 5
2. MINERAL CERTIFICATION IN THE GREAT LAKES REGION: A CONSTANT CHALLENGE ..... 7
3 ICGLR’S REGIONAL INITIATIVE AGAINST THE ILLEGAL EXPLOITATION OF NATURAL
RESOURCES (RINR).......................................................................................................... 12
3.1 Introduction ................................................................................................................ 12
3.2 Governance of RINR .................................................................................................... 12
3.3 The six tools of RINR .................................................................................................... 13
3.3.1 Regional Certification Mechanism (RCM) ................................................................................... 13
3.3.2 Harmonisation of National Legislations ..................................................................................... 16
3.3.3 Regional Database on Mineral Flows ......................................................................................... 17
3.3.4 Formalisation .............................................................................................................................. 17
3.3.5 EITI Peer Learning Mechanism ................................................................................................... 18
3.3.6 Whistle-blowing Mechanism ...................................................................................................... 18
3.4 Status of implementation by ICGLR member States against the six tools ....................... 18
3.4.1 General implementation ............................................................................................................. 18
3.4.2 Implementation progress by country (see Annex 1) ................................................................... 21
3.4.3 Major achievements and success factors ................................................................................... 22
3.4.4 Challenges .................................................................................................................................. 23
4 COMPARING THE RINR WITH OTHER CERTIFICATION SCHEMES AND INITIATIVES ...... 25
4.1 The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) ..................................................... 25
4.2 The OECD Due Diligence Guidance ............................................................................... 28
4.3 The Dodd-Frank Act ..................................................................................................... 29
4.4 The Fairtrade and Fairmined (FT/FM) standard for gold from ASM............................... 29
4.5 The World Gold Council Conflict-free Gold (CFG) standard ............................................ 31
4.6 The ITRI Tin Supply Chan Initiative (iTSCi) ..................................................................... 33
4.7 BGR’s Certified Trading Chains (CTC) and analytical fingerprint technology ................... 34
4.8 Conflict-Free Smelter Program (CFS) ............................................................................ 35
4.9 The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) ................................................. 36
5 CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD .......................................................................... 38
6 REFERENCES ............................................................................................................ 41
7 ANNEX 1- IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 6 TOOLS- COUNTRY BY COUNTRY ANALYSIS .... 46
3

Table of figures
Figure 1: Democratic Republic of Congo and Adjoining countries .............................................................. 7
Figure 2: Minerals Supply Chain ............................................................................................................................. 10
Figure 3: Minerals Supply Chain by Mechanisms ............................................................................................. 11
Figure 4: Great Lakes Mineral Flows in the Congo Region ........................................................................... 16
Figure 5: ICGLR Monitoring of Great Lakes Mineral Flows .......................................................................... 17
4

1 INTRODUCTION
Several African countries are endowed with considerable amounts of mineral resources.
These resources play a crucial role in the economy, as they account for a significant share of
exports. Indeed, mineral resource exports contribute to merchandise exports in almost half of
Africa’s 54 countries.
While the exploitation of mineral resources should have a positive effect on economic growth
as it provides sufficient financial resources for building economic infrastructure and human
capital, it has not been the case for most African countries. Poor performance in mineral
economies has been linked, inter alia, to the disenfranchisement and conflict about the
resources; poor legal and regulatory frameworks and weak institutional capacity, including
for negotiation of mineral agreements; illicit financial flows that are lost by Africa through
transfer pricing and other mechanisms used by private companies; and the negative impact
that resource rents have on the workings of political institutions, as they create political
incentives for discretionary or non-transparent management of public expenditure.
The link between natural exploitation and conflict is well documented. Natural resources
driven conflicts have been fuelled by grievances on access to rights, perceptions of unfair
distributions of benefits, disenfranchised groups or by pure economic reasons: the business of
war. Classic cases include the role played by diamonds to sustain conflicts in Angola, Sierra
Leone and Liberia, and similarly gold, diamonds, coltan and other minerals in the case of DR
Congo. Several mechanisms have been established to curb this link. Chiefly among them, the
Kimberley Process, which is meant to improve traceability in the diamond industry and
eliminate the flow of conflict diamonds. In the Great Lakes region, which is most frequently
cited as an example of the resource curse , the most important framework is the Regional
Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources in the Great Lakes Region
(RINR), being coordinated by the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR).
“Conflict minerals” are ores that, when sold or traded, have played key roles in helping to
fuel conflict and extensive human rights abuses, since the late 1990s, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC). The main conflict minerals are the so-called “3TGs”: ores of
tantalum and niobium, tin, tungsten; gold; and their derivatives. Diverse international efforts
to break the link between mineral trade and conflict in the Great Lakes region have been
proposed or are under way. Key initiatives include government and industry-led mineral
tracking and certification schemes. These are designed to monitor trade in minerals to keep
armed groups from financially benefitting from this commerce, in compliance with firm-level
and/or industry due diligence policies that prohibit transactions with armed groups.
Recognizing that the key problem is the missing linkage between the supply chain of natural
resource and the formal economy of the ICGLR member States, and the fact that the
exploitation and trade within the region are frequently conducted illegally, the ICGLR RINR
seeks to redress these issues through a comprehensive approach including an elaborate
Regional Certification Mechanism (RCM).
The Special report on the implementation of the ICGLR RINR will start by analyzing
certification processes in general and their challenges; focus on the ICGLR RINR and
highlight the progress made as well as achievements and success factors; flag any issues and
5

challenges that may have arisen that prevent its implementation; and make comparative
analysis with other certification mechanisms and initiatives.
The Special Report will seek to:
- Analyze certification processes and their challenges
- Update on achievements and success factors as well progress made in the
implementation of the RINR in member States
- Flag any issues and challenges that hamper its implementation
- Offer a comparative analysis with other existing initiatives (the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, the OECD Guidance, the Dodd Frank Act, the FairTrade
Fairmines standard, the Conflict free Gold Standard, the ITRI itSci, the Certified
Trading Chains, the Conflict free Smelter (CFS), the EITI)
- Draw lessons learned and best practices
- Propose solution and way forward
- Acquire feedback from various stakeholders after its being presented during 17th ICE
in Kampala, Uganda
- Discuss the issue with experts, practitioners and other stakeholders during an Ad-hoc
Experts Group Meeting (AEGM) organized in Kampala, Uganda.
The overall expected results are:
- Enhanced understanding of certification mechanisms through analysis of supply
chains of mineral resources to prevent their links to conflict
- Awareness creation on the ICGLR RINR
- Improved knowledge on best practices and lessons learnt through comparative
analysis with other certification mechanisms and initiatives
- Increased partnership and collaboration with ICGLR
6

2 MINERAL CERTIFICATION IN THE GREAT LAKES REGION: A
CONSTANT CHALLENGE
Minerals such as tin, tantalum, tungsten and to a lesser degree gold1 (3TGs), that are major
inputs for smartphones, laptops and other products2, are most significantly sourced from the
DRC and the Great Lakes Region of Africa. These minerals are mostly mined by artisanal
and small scale miners whose livelihoods very much depend on these mineral supply chains.
Unfortunately, these minerals also contribute to the financing of DRC’s continuous armed
conflict and have been labeled ‘conflict minerals’. The conflict in the DRC has been one of
the most tragic of the last few decades. It has been estimated that total loss of life in the
region has exceeded 5 million. There are a number of issues driving the conflict, but one of
the most discussed is the role that the mineral trade, particularly with regards to the 3TG,
plays in financing conflict. Figure 1 shows the map of DRC and adjoining countries and some
figures for global production of the 3 TGs.
Figure 1: Democratic Republic of Congo and Adjoining countries
Source: A.T. Kearney Analysis. June 2012
1 US Geological Survey, 2010; Bawa, 2010.
2 ICT industry consumes over 50%-60% of tantalum, up to 26% of tin, and 9% of gold (Burt, 2011; Vodafone,
2012.)
7

Following its resolution 1291 (2000), in June 2000 the UN Security Council (UNSC) first
established the Panel of Experts to investigate the illegal exploitation of DRC’s natural
resources and identify any potential links between natural resources and the ongoing conflict
in eastern DRC.3 In 2003, the Panel issued its final report concluding that: "The flow of arms,
exploitation and the continuation of the conflict are inextricably linked."4
Tracing and tracking the provenance and the supply chains of these minerals is essential as
they can be used to fuel conflicts and could lead to massive displacements, and instability. If
their provenance and ‘routes’’ are not transparent, it could also trigger boycott from
consumers and loss of investor confidence, deterring the people to actually benefit from these
resources in a sustainable manner. Mining itself is not inherently unsustainable if it is
responsibly managed. A regional solution is important as conflict minerals are mined in one
country and exported through another. There is thus need for a comprehensive mineral
tracking and a certification mechanism.
A relatively new creation in the aftermath of globalization, certification is the result of the
desire of global consumers to ensure that the products they use in their daily life conform to
certain ethical and environmental standards, even if the supply of raw materials and
manufactured products has moved overseas beyond the reach of their own domestic
legislation. In recognition of the power and influence that public and consumers have,
producers of these products are aware and conscious that they have to fill this market
demand. Indeed there is emergence of booming new markets for “ethically-certified”
products. Certification is therefore by nature a voluntary agreement between consumers and
producers, without consideration on where they physically live in the world. While
consumers agree to seek out or limit their consumption to some specific products that meet
their standard, producers agree to meet that same agreed upon standard. Both sides agree
upon an independent auditor to verify that the standard is being met, rendering it beneficial to
both sides.
Producers stand to gain from this arrangement. Certification systems could be considered by
producers as another form of risk mitigation in brand management. Indeed, producers could
gain more secure market access - an advantage in the marketplace over competitors that are
not certified - and often a price premium, willingly paid by consumers in recognition of the
added value of the product. In addition, certification systems reduce transaction costs for
providing assurance of corporate social and environmental accountability. Consumers gain in
terms of satisfaction of knowing that their daily purchasing decisions are supporting the
moral, ethical and environmental standards to which they subscribe. While certification
processes were initially driven by the Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and educated
consumers, it has gained support in the private sector and the development agencies as a way
to promote Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in developing countries.
Where sanctions aim to use economic forces to influence behavior by withdrawing from the
market, certification offers interested buyers (consumers and companies) a mechanism
whereby they can selectively purchase only those materials that meet a certain standard, be it
for origin, method of production or social and environmental impact. Where conflict is the
major issue, a certificate of origin guarantees the buyer that, at a minimum, proceeds from the
purchase of the material will not be used to finance or benefit belligerent armed groups.
3 United Nations Security Council, 2003-2005
4
Report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, S/2003/1027, October 23, 2003. Paragraph 59, p. 19.
8

This is the case of the Kimberley Process. Other certification schemes go beyond origin and
guarantee the conditions under which a product is produced. The Fair Labor Association
(FLA) originated out of allegations that garment manufacturers in developing countries were
employing exploitative practices in the manufacture of textiles and garments destined for
retail in developed countries. The FLA certifies that garments and textiles were manufactured
in a manner that respects workers’ rights. In the same vein, the Forest Stewardship Council
(FSC) certification guarantees that the wood products in question were produced in ways
respecting environmental sustainability.
A mineral certification scheme modeled on these lines would guarantee not just the origin
and traceability of the minerals but also certify that the conditions under which they were
mined and traded had met certain standards. Certification of mineral origin and traceability
would enable to link these standards to specific mine sites. This kind of certification would
help buyers curtail the supply of tainted conflict minerals, to exclude violation of broad
international standards (child labor for example) in their supply chain. In doing so, they
would positively choose ethical minerals, sourced and produced in ways that contributed to
the peaceful economic and social development of the Great Lakes region.
While acknowledging and focusing efforts on a broader range of CSR issues, many NGOs,
companies, governments, and consumers have expressed concern about and focused much
attention on the link between natural resource extraction and conflict. The extraction and
trade of minerals (including diamonds), timber, and oil are thought to have directly or
indirectly financed warring groups and violence or other human rights abuses in areas such as
Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire, Cambodia, Angola, and Liberia. Since 1996, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC) has been a focus of international concern, with a history of
governance challenges and large mineral deposits believed to be contributing to violence
perpetrated by rebel groups as well as the Congolese army.
Many minerals originating in conflict regions such as the DRC, including gold, tin, tantalum,
and tungsten, end up in products such as computers, cell phones, and other personal
electronics, as well as in many other products like jewellery, airplanes and automobiles.
Greater awareness of these issues on the part of the public and end-use industries such as
electronics has prompted a closer investigation of their supply chains. However, these
companies face significant challenges due to a lack of transparency and complex structure
and relationships in particular metals supply chains.
The complexity of conflict minerals becomes apparent when looking at a communications
company as an example. The company would need to filter through 35 manufacturers, 60 to
80 parts suppliers, more than 1,000 commodity parts suppliers, and an unknown number of
distributors to get to all of its sources. Since only very small quantities of conflict minerals
are typically integrated into any given product, traceability is even more difficult. For
example, a 2 kilogram laptop contains 10 grams of tin, 0.6 grams of tantalum, 0.3 grams of
gold, and 0.0009 grams of tungsten. Smelters, where metals of diverse origins come together
to be processed, have been identified as the crucial traceability point. Fortunately, the number
of smelters within the overall supply network is still manageable.5 (see Figure 2 for an
illustration of the minerals supply value chain).
5 A.T. Kearney. 2012. Conflict Minerals: Yet Another Supply Chain Challenge. June.
http://www.atkearney.com/paper/-/asset_publisher/dVxv4Hz2h8bS/content/conflict-minerals-yet-another-
supply-chain-challenge/10192.
9

Figure 2: Minerals Supply Chain
Artisanal Mine/ Local Industrial Elecronics
Smelter End User
Mining Processor Exporter Producer Industry
Minerals typically lose their provenance (or traceability) as they move through the supply
chain from mine to product. Transparency can be challenged due to one or more of the
following typical supply chain characteristics and processes: mixing of ore, particularly
during trading and prior to smelting; the smelting or refining process, where ore is processed
to obtain the target metal, with a smelter often drawing from different sources; and/or re-
melting, re-processing or recycling of metals. While there have been tremendous advances
with regards to certification, there still remains some difficulties verifying sources that enter
the supply chain from mines that are illegal or part of the informal economy. With these
sources, a paper trail can be difficult to establish and verify, and many question the credibility
of record-keeping related to these sources. In regions such as the Great Lakes, supply chain
tracking mechanisms are likely to be necessary with regard to informal, artisanal and small-
scale sources. Some positive examples of relevant mechanisms include those developed by
the Association for Responsible Mining.6
This means that, while end-use companies have the potential to establish and have confidence
in sources for some percentage of the metals in their products, they cannot assert 100%
sourcing certainty about individual metals or the product as a whole without significant
alterations and/or assurance mechanisms in their supply chains. Success requires confidence
in supply chain relationships and new strategies, such as direct sourcing, or innovations, such
as minerals tagging or fingerprinting. A number of efforts are underway, and many of these
were undertaken in consultation with local civil society leaders and Congolese mineral trade
exports. In particular, an effort called PROMINES involving the Congolese government, the
World Bank, and industry has made great strides towards improving transparency and
accountability.
Currently, the ICGLR, the ITRI, the OECD, and the SEC are all pursuing traceability
regulations and schemes, sometimes in consultation with one another and sometimes without
doing so. Other schemes include MONUSCO’s creation of trading centers, and the German
government’s BGR program. The problem is compounded in that traceability is possible with
some commodities (eg, diamonds), but extraordinarily difficult with others (namely, gold).
As shown in Figure 3 below, most mechanisms focus on the upstream side (from mine to
smelter) with a few focussing on the downstream side (from smelter to end users). The risk
areas where the audits should focus are indicated in yellow and include where the mines are
processed at the mine site; when they are with the local exporter, and particularly at the
smelters.
6 Alliance for Responsible Mining, 2010. Fairtrade and Fairmined Gold: Information for business and
designers. At www.fairtrade.org.uk/press_office/default.aspx.
10

Figure 3: Minerals Supply Chain by Mechanisms
Source: BGR
11

3 ICGLR’S REGIONAL INITIATIVE AGAINST THE ILLEGAL
EXPLOITATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES (RINR)
3.1 Introduction
The ICGLR was founded in 2006 against the backdrop of the war in the DRC (2002-2006)
with the assistance of the African Union, the United Nations, and bilateral partners. The
ICGLR’s main objective is to enhance regional security, stability and Development. Its
activities are coordinated from a Secretariat established in 2007 in Bujumbura, Burundi.
The ICGLR is a political platform, which has the task to harmonise views, actions and
politics concerning regional challenges amongst the member States. In the Dar-Es-Salaam
Declaration, the Heads of State and Governments of the ICGLR agreed to seal a Pact on
Security, Stability and Development. The Pact confirms the determination and commitment
of member States to “transform the Great Lakes Region into a space of sustainable peace
and security for States and people, political and social stability, shared growth and
development”.7
Following this commitment, the ICGLR “Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation
of Natural Resources” (RINR) was launched in 2009, which particularly aims at breaking the
link between mineral revenues and rebel financing. The RINR outlines specific actions
needed to translate the Great Lakes region’s rich mineral resources from a source of conflict
into a catalyst for development.
On 15 December 2006, the eleven member States of the ICGLR signed the Protocol on the
Fight against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources. The Protocol provides the legal
basis for the implementation of the RINR. The Lusaka Declaration, signed on 15 December
2010, specifies six complementary tools, which will comprise a regional control mechanism
aimed at eradicating the main source of funding for violent conflict in the region.
The six tools are:
1. the creation of a regional certification mechanism for natural resource supply chains,
2. the harmonization of national legislation in member states,
3. the construction of a regional database on mineral flows,
4. the formalization of the artisanal mining sector,
5. the promotion of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) peer learning
mechanism, and
6. the establishment of a whistle-blowing mechanism.
3.2 Governance of RINR
A Regional Steering Committee, comprising technical experts from all ICGLR Member
States, has been charged with the steering of all activities within the RINR since September
2009.
7 ICGLR. 2006. Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region. December.
https://icglr.org/IMG/pdf/Pact_on_Security_Stability_Development-S.pdf.
12

Its suggestions on policies and technical guidelines are to be approved at a later stage by the
Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee as well as the ICGLR Summit. Meanwhile, the ICGLR
Secretariat is collecting and managing the data provided by member States and acts as an
exchange platform on issues concerning the Initiative.
While the constitutive meeting of the Steering Committee of the Regional initiative against
the illegal exploitation of natural resources was held in Gisenyi (Rubavu), Rwanda in
September-October 2009, the second meeting was held in Bujumbura, Burundi in April 2010;
the third in Nairobi in September 2010; the fourth in Resha, Burundi in April 2011; the fifth
in Bujumbura, Burundi in April 2011; and the sixth and seventh in Bujumbura in May and
November 2012, respectively.
This Special report draws extensively from the minutes of these Steering Committee
meetings, which were graciously shared by ICGLR/GIZ.
3.3 The six tools of RINR8
Approved by the ICGLR member States, the RINR operates with six specific tools designed
by the ICGLR Conference Secretariat.
3.3.1 Regional Certification Mechanism (RCM)9
The RINR is primarily established to track the chain of custody of four selected natural
resources, namely cassiterite, wolframite, coltan and gold, also referred to as ‘conflict
minerals’. The RCM aims at guaranteeing that neither mine site nor channels of trade within
the country and the region are in predatory control of armed groups or criminal networks.
8 ICGLR website. http://www.icglr.org.
9 Blore, Shawn and Smilie, Ian. 2010. An ICGLR-based tracking and certification for minerals based in the
Great Lakes Region of Central Africa. March.
13

The guiding principles are (i) transparency i.e. data on mineral flows would be made public
as it enhances the role of civil society as an oversight body; (ii) the burden of proof fails
primarily on exporters and secondly on the governments, which means that responsibility to
follow procedures and sanctions for non-compliance both fall on industry; (iii) mandatory
third party audits, which implies the recruitment of auditors by the ICGLR Audit committee
which includes representatives from government, industry and Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs) and that would issue substantive, automatic penalties for non-
compliance; (iv) to adapt existing current systems as much as possible and not to reinvent the
wheel if credible systems are already in place; and (v) design for adaptability, so that the
mechanism stays present with time and incorporates relevant and best practice standards as
much as possible.
The ICGLR RCM Manual, which sets out the standards and procedures for chain of custody
systems and certification in-region, was informed by BGR’s Certified Trading Chains (CTC)
and the OECD Due Diligence Guidance, and also integrates lessons learned from industry-led
chain of custody systems, including iTSCi.10 It “seeks to promote the mineral sector’s role in
the peaceful economic and social development within the member States of the Great Lakes
Region by establishing common regional standards for transparency… working conditions,
environmental performance and community consultation.”
RCM works by designating certain circumstances and/or outcomes of production as red-,
yellow- or green-flags. A red-flag “means a violation of one of the system critical criteria of
either the standards or procedures for mine site inspection and approval … or a violation of
one of the system-critical criteria for Third Party Audits.” 11
Implementation of the RCM relies on four main system elements: (i) Chain of custody
tracking from mine site to export; (ii) Regional tracking of mineral flows via ICGLR
database; (iii) Regular independent third-party audits; and (iv) an Independent Mineral Chain
Auditor.
a) Chain of custody tracking from mine site to export (upstream)
The task of tracking from mine site to export (upstream) is entrusted to national governments
before export. They ought to be able to trace national production from mine to export. They
should also be able to trace minerals imported and then re-exported. It is the duty of the
governments to also review the chain of custody of documents before export with a view to
establishing that minerals can be tracked from mine site to exporter (producer countries) or
border post to exporting countries (reprocessing countries). An ICGLR certificate will be
issued to countries exports that have the appropriate chain of custody documents. This
certificate will be the evidence that there is compliance throughout the region.
b) Regional tracking of mineral flows via ICGLR database (see Section 3 below)
c) Regular independent third-party audits
A major innovation from existing certification mechanisms, the independent third party
audits are conducted independently of government, industry and civil society. They will
provide additional assurance that the chain of custody procedures have been adequately
followed by all participants in the mineral chain.
10 Some of these certification schemes will be reviewed in detail in Chapter 4 of this report.
11 ICGLR Certification Manual. 2011.
14

As thee are regular audits they will reinforce credibility and legitimacy of the ICGLR system
for all parties concerned including end users, consumers, civil society and the international
community.
In order to acquire the ICGLR certificate, this ‘dual –key system’ requires that participants do
not only have to prove that they follow proper chain of custody but also pass regular third
party audits. Otherwise, they would be classified as ‘non-compliant’, and the consequences
with regards to the market will be significant.
While an Audit Committee works within ICGLR, it is independent. It will be composed of
members of government, industry and civil society in equal numbers. The role of the Audit
committee is to accredit auditors; sets audit terms of reference for audits; determines scope
and frequency of audits; commissions auditors; receives finished results; publishes them and
recommends further action. The auditors will be accredited by the ICGLR Audit Committee
and paid for by the exporting company which may pass on parts of these costs to its suppliers.
Since the number of members of the Audit Committee is limited, it may be useful to have a
rotating system that allows all member States to be represented over time. The audits focus
on the exporter who is responsible for his own compliance and the one of his suppliers. The
auditing report is shared with the respective exporting company, the member States and the
ICGLR Secretariat.
d) Independent Mineral Chain Auditor.
The independent mineral chain auditor’s function is to analyse and monitor the data from the
ICGLR database and look for discrepancies and anomalies. He is able to initiate further
investigation, issue reports, suggest sanctions and/or solutions. The Auditor has the authority
to declare a participant non-compliant should he find non-compliance of a participant. The
Mineral Chain Auditor’s appointment is structured to provide full independence and freedom
of action. As the last action in the process of certification, the Independent Mineral chain
Auditor can react to unforeseen situations and close loopholes that were not foreseen when
the system was created. He/she is to be appointed by the Executive Secretary on the basis of
a list of candidates proposed by the member States. The Steering Committee of the RINR
recommended that the Independent Mineral Chain Auditor be hosted by the ICGLR
Conference Secretariat and that its office be permanent. Figure 4 below shows hoe the
minerals flow from the DRC and how they can be traced.
15

Figure 4: Great Lakes Mineral Flows in the Congo Region
Source: Shawn Blore and Ian Smilie. 2010.
An additional element for the RCM is the Analytical Finger Printing (AFP). The AFP)
project is a joint program of the ICGLR and BGR within the German Cooperation. The
overall goal of this project is the development and application of traceability and monitoring
mechanisms for mineral production and trade. This will contribute to the implementation of
the Regional Certification Mechanism. In order to achieve this objective, the AFP works in
three steps namely the sample preparation laboratories and storage, central analytical
laboratory and database management. The Analytical Fingerprinting (AFP) project is
integrated into the RINR as an additional element to reinforce the credibility of the Regional
Certification Mechanism after being approved by the Regional Committee in November
2011.
A study was undertaken to figure out where the AFP should be housed and according to the
study it is best suited at the Southern and Eastern African Mineral Centre (SEAMIC) based in
Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania. Member States unanimously agreed that the Analytical
Fingerprinting laboratory be located in Tanzania within the SEAMIC Center and recommend
that this decision is presented to the Regional Interministerial Committee for consideration.
3.3.2 Harmonisation of National Legislations
Domestication of the legal provisions of the Protocol into the national legislation of the
member States is essential as stipulated in §22 of the Protocol. Moreover, the harmonisation
approach comprises the identification of key differences between legal frameworks governing
the mineral sector in the different member States. The RINR facilitated this process by
consulting its member States and drafting a model law which will accelerate the process of
domestication.
16

3.3.3 Regional Database on Mineral Flows
The creation of a regional database showing the production and trade of selected primary
commodities in the Great Lakes Region is another very crucial tool. The availability and
disclosure of this data will allow for the depiction of regional trade patterns and is also aimed
at building trust among the member States. The regional database is hosted at the ICGLR
Secretariat in Bujumbura, Burundi. It is envisaged that data on regional mineral flows will be
transmitted to ICGLR on a monthly basis. For each participant, analysis will be undertaken
on the data provided and inquire if exports match imports. In case of a difference, the
participant will be given a chance to explain and correct. If it is unable to rectify the
correction, the participant will be declared non-compliant. To ensure transparency and
accountability, all data and the analyses will be made available for public access. Figure 5
shows where the data are collected and gives a holistic picture of monitoring through data
acquisition.
Figure 5: ICGLR Monitoring of Great Lakes Mineral Flows
Source: Shawn Blore and Ian Smilie. 2010.
3.3.4 Formalisation
The objective of this tool is to encourage the formalisation of artisanal mining to improve
taxation systems, to provide of extension services and capacity building. It aims at improving
regulations, particularly in terms of simplifying registration and accounting requirements thus
increasing productivity. This will in turn increase transparency and thereby help reducing
fraud. This applies to extraction, processing and trading within the member States.
17

3.3.5 EITI Peer Learning Mechanism
During the last few years the number of ICGLR member States endorsing the standards of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) has been constantly increasing and
several more member States have signalled their intent to implement the EITI. As the
experience of more advanced countries is very valuable to newcomers, the ICGLR is a
suitable forum for the facilitation of a peer learning mechanism. Additionally, it is envisaged
that mineral volumes, represented by financial revenues recorded by EITI, are balanced with
the physical mineral volumes traded, recorded by the ICGLR Regional Database. The ICGLR
also calls upon the EITI for the extension of the initiative to cover small scale mining in the
informal sector.
3.3.6 Whistle-blowing Mechanism
The implementation of a whistle-blowing mechanism aims at capitalising on the knowledge
of individuals witnessing or participating in illicit mineral activities. A web-based platform
will provide a possibility to anonymously report such confidential information which would
then be followed up by an independent mineral chain auditor (refer to Tool I: Regional
Certification Mechanism).
3.4 Status of implementation by ICGLR member States against the six
tools
3.4.1 General implementation
3.4.1.1 Mineral traceability and Certification scheme
With regards to mineral traceability and certification scheme, its implementation is
undergoing a number of processes. During the second meeting of the Steering Committee of
the RINR in 2010, the document on tracking and certification mechanism of mines in the
Great Lakes Region was presented by Partnership Africa Canada (PAC), and in 2010, it was
recommended to adopt the certification system with a gradual implementation over a period
of one to two years in order to ensure that all participating parties familiarise and adapt
themselves to the new regulations In 2011, a certification manual was developed and
updated. Steps are being taken for the accreditation of auditors and the conduction of pilot
audits.
The ICGLR Certification Manual was revised in the spirit of the ICGLR Heads of State to
fully harmonise it with other schemes in place. First, the standards of the ICGLR
Certification Mechanism were harmonised with the OECD Due Diligence Guidance.
Accordingly, mine sites that engage in conflict and child labour will be marked with a red
flag which stands for immediate disengagement. Mines marked with a yellow flag will be
accorded a period of 6 months to show improvement. Exporters who are marked with a green
flag receive an ICGLR certificate which is valid for 12 months. Second, the ICGLR audits
will serve the requirements of the CTC and OECD schemes. This means that there will be
only one audit for all schemes which covers the entire regional chain of custody from mine
site to export.
18

Thirdly, the traceability system in the ICGLR Regional Certification Mechanism is to a large
extent similar to the iTSCi scheme which is already in place in some of the member States
and is recognized as a valid traceability scheme for the RCM. However, the iTSCi scheme
often regards ITRI as the owner of the collected data whereas the ICGLR assigns full
ownership to its member States. It is therefore recommended that member States negotiating
agreements with ITRI ensure that they have full ownership of their tracking data.
In November 2011, member States adopted the Certification Manual as amended by the 5th
meeting of the ICGLR Steering Committee and welcomed its harmonization with the OECD
Due Diligence Guidance for responsible supply chains of minerals from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas in accordance with the Lusaka Declaration. While member States renewed
their commitment to implement the Certification Mechanism as soon as possible, they agreed
upon the possibility of extending the deadline of December 15th, 2012 for the
implementation of the Certification Mechanism. The member State seeking extension should
formally communicate this to the ICGLR Secretariat.
On 28-30 October 2012 in Kigali, Rwanda, a regional Audit Committee was established. The
Bureau is composed of a Chair from Rwanda; Vice-chair from Kenya and a Rapporteur from
the DRC. The function of the Independent Mineral Chain Auditor should be operationalised
as quickly as possible for the certification mechanism to be implemented in full swing.
3.4.1.2 Harmonization of national policies/domestication of the Protocol
Article 22 of the Protocol of the regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources in the Great Lakes Region recommends the harmonization of the legislation of
member States. The provisions of the Protocol can be grouped along three basic themes:
sovereignty, criminalization and cooperation. These central themes must be analyzed
carefully and together in order to achieve sound domestication of both global and specific
provisions. The domestication process could be achieved in four main stages. First, States
shall review their legislation in order to identify gaps existing between national laws and the
Protocol. Then the parties would organize workshops and consultations with the concerned
services and agencies. A legislation model could then be adopted with a view to be used for
regional harmonization. The final stage will be a legislative process for the adoption of the
defined laws, the procedure which depends on national provisions.
In June 2012, a technical workshop was held in Kampala, Uganda with experts in the
respective fields of legislation and natural resources aimed at following up on the process of
legal harmonization and domestication of the ICGLR Protocol on Natural Resources. The
workshop provided an exchange platform on how the respective member States can
incorporate the ICGLR Protocol in their respective domestic legislations, so that the regional
obligations may become applicable and enforceable in the countries concerned. Member
States contributed by identifying their respective needs in terms of national legislation and
domestication of the Protocol. The participants discussed the draft “model law” to
domesticate the Protocol and developed proposals on how to refine the existing draft and
allow for all member States’ needs to be respected and reflected in their legislation.
The recommendations of the workshop were integrated into the “model law” draft version.
The “model law” also made reference to the Regional Certification Mechanism without
introducing specific legislation.
The model law is now serving as a template for member States to incorporate regional
obligations into their domestic laws. Some member States (eg: Uganda and Burundi) already
took the necessary steps to begin harmonizing their legislation.
19

3.4.1.3 Creation of an information exchange system (Regional database)
In 2009, the need for more systematic data collection and analysis, on a regular basis, in
order to fight the illegal exploitation of Natural Resources was underlined and paved the way
for the creation of the ICGLR database with statistics on the production and trade of mineral
resources.
The Data Base System is hosted in the ICGLR Secretariat.
There are six types of databases which are either owned by the member States or the ICGLR:
- Member States database of exporters;
- ICGLR database of exporters;
- national mine site database;
- regional mine site database;
- Member States mineral tracking database;
- ICGLR mineral tracking database.
The regional database will be managed by the ICGLR and derives its data from the member
States, including the flow of data from mines, mineral processors, comptoirs and smelters to
the ICGLR Regional Mineral Tracking Database. (See Figure 5 above).
The Regional Committee recommended that member States establish three national databases
(Mine Site Database, the Mineral Tracking Database and Exporters Database) with the
assistance of the ICGLR Secretariat.
In 2011, major steps taken for the development of this tool encompass missions in Burundi,
Rwanda and the DRC to inform government officials on the use of the data sheet. Although
the database already comprises some data on production and trade, the use of similar excel
sheets, which were developed with support from Partnership Africa Canada, will ensure that
in the future the data submitted by member States is consistent and can be used for analytical
purposes. Data is already being submitted by the member States, focusing on statistics of
production and exports for the 4 minerals.
3.4.1.4 Whistle blowing mechanism
The Whistle Blowing Mechanism attempts to capitalise on the knowledge of individuals and
thus reinforce the Certification Mechanism. By enacting the Protocol, the member States
agreed to protect persons who, in good faith, provide information on illegal activities. The
Mineral Chain Auditor follows up on information provided by the Whistle Blowing
Mechanism.
A stock taking mission took place in some member States (Burundi, DRC, Rwanda and
Kenya) in August 2011 to consult with national law enforcement authorities and
anticorruption commissions, which will be pivotal actors for a successful implementation of
the regional whistle-blowing mechanism. The results of the fact-finding mission demonstrate
the overall support for the mechanism by member States and recommend starting with a first
phase focusing on the Eastern part of the DRC. Currently, an extension of the pilot zone in
Burundi is also under way.
20

Based on experience from this first phase, the tool will then be extended to other areas and
countries.
It was noted that closer regional cooperation in law enforcement and similar activities, such
as an effective sensitization of the civil society and the monitoring of financial flows through
Financial Intelligence Units in the member States, was necessary and critical in order to
successfully implement the whistle-blowing mechanism. Moreover, the report points out that
the mechanism may possibly be integrated in existing structures. As the verification and the
processing of whistle-blower information is closely related to the Independent Mineral Chain
Auditor’s (IMCA) overall mandate, an approach would be to utilize these exiting structures to
avoid duplication and increase the credibility of the system.
In 2012, a number of consultancies have been commissioned to deal with crucial aspects in
the preparatory phase for the mechanism’s pilot project in DRC’s Kivu provinces. A scoping
mission to DRC to consult the relevant authorities in DRC which will be operating the
mechanism as well as design the content of the training modules took place in August. In
addition, efforts have been made to obtain a phone number for the SMS platform from a local
phone operator (possibly AIRTEL or Vodacom).
Given the recognition that a good knowledge of the risks that might jeopardize the success of
the whistle blowing project is necessary, a consultant has been commissioned to carry out a
risk analysis in the target areas for the pilot project and propose risk mitigation measures. The
whistle blowing mechanism is expected to be launched beginning of January 2013, with prior
focus on DRC and Burundi.
3.4.1.5 Formalisation of ASM
Member States are requested to formalize the artisanal mining industry and ensure it delivers
tangible benefits to the miners through building their capacities and transforming their social
economic livelihoods. They have made significant progress on this from as the country by
country analysis shows (See Annex1- Implementation of the 6 tools- country by country).
3.4.2 Implementation progress by country (see Annex 1)
As shown in Annex 1, which was compiled from the various RINR Steering Committee
meeting reports, progress has been uneven among ICGLR member States and against the
various tools.
With regards to formalisation of ASM, all countries have made some progress, in particular
in the creation and recognition of cooperatives. For mineral traceability and certification,
implementation is taking place in DRC and Rwanda in 2012. Additional implementation of
the ICGLR RCM is envisaged in Burundi and Uganda in the near term (next two years).
Eventually, the system is intended to be applied to all ICGLR member States. Indeed,
Rwanda is implementing the iTSCi traceability scheme and the Certified Trading Chains
(CTC) project. In DRC, mineral traceability is being implemented in several mineral
territories of the country in collaboration with ITRI. Both DRC and Rwanda are going to
deliver their first certificates soon.
21

Specifically for EITI, at the end of November 2012, Burundi announced its willingness to
join the initiative. This marks an opportunity for the ICGLR to start with the implementation
process of this tool. It is to be noted that the Republic of Congo, DRC, the CAR, Zambia and
Tanzania have already joined the EITI.
3.4.3 Major achievements and success factors
Despite being a relatively new initiative, the RINR has already achieved some remarkable
successes in its fight against the illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Great Lakes
Region. The Regional Certification Mechanism is in place and a certification manual, which
provides a practical guide for its implementation has been developed and approved by the 11
Heads of State.
Another important step was the elaboration of a ‘model law’ which will make it easier for
ICGLR member States to domesticate the legal provisions of the Protocol into national
legislation. In that regard, member States are cooperating in their fight against mineral fraud
with reference to the Lusaka Declaration and they are in the process of including the RINR
into their legal framework. Also worth mentioning is the test version of a database which has
already started to gather data on the production and exports of selected natural resources.
Another achievement is the set up of the Regional Audit committee as the third independent
parties. A notable achievement is also the decision to set up a laboratory for the Analytical
Fingerprinting in SEAMIC, in Tanzania.
The visibility of ICGLR has increased and the ICGLR has reached unanimous political
support and the commitment of its member States to implement the six tools of the RINR.
The initiative has enabled dialogue between the various countries and helped alleviate the
tensions, mistrust and deep antagonisms amongst them. It has also given recognition to the
ICGLR as the key stakeholder for issues of mineral governance in the Great Lakes Region.
The fact that ICGLR has been able to mobilise considerable external support for the RINR
from a variety of partners is a positive sign and has accelerated the implementation of the
various tools of the RINR, especially trainings and workshops in a number of areas.
The external success factors for the RINR include the fact there is increasing demand for
minerals and metals with the advent of emerging economies such as China and India in the
market and the global commodities boom; that awareness creation and sensitisation of the
public for conflict minerals have led to action by industry and international legislation (the
Dodd-Frank Act) through heightened consumer responsibility and NGO campaigns; and that
the ICGLR has become the African regional organization mandated to specifically address
conflict minerals.
Another success factor for the RINR is that it is strategically focused on a narrowly defined
issue (conflict resources, specifically on four minerals). It also strategically combines a
political process to create dialogue and build confidence with a technical approach (i.e.
development of the six tools, with external technical input). Another success factor is that
RINR builds on existing initiatives such as the ITRI, CTC and the KPCS; and applies lessons
learned from the precedent initiatives.
22

Moreover, the governance structure of RINR, which includes the establishment of a formal
platform between all member States through the Regional Committee enables close and
regular consultations with the member States as well as cooperation with a number of
stakeholders including governments, intergovernmental organisations (OECD), private sector
(ITRI) as well as civil society. ICGLR gained credibility as it is integrated in the international
network. The steering structure is in itself a success factor as the Regional Committee is
composed of qualified experts from all member States and their regular meetings creates
dialogue and co-ownership; and guarantees follow-up on the development of the six tools.
RINR’s communication strategy which includes informing major stakeholders about the
initiative; participating in key meetings; and actively seeking media coverage through regular
articles, is another success factor.
3.4.4 Challenges
 Institutional and operational structure
One of the main challenges of the ICGLR RINR is that it has quickly moved from a
conceptual framework to one that needs to be implemented on the ground. What the Lusaka
Declaration implies in practice is that the role of the ICGLR Secretariat has been inflated to
not only coordinate and facilitate political processes but to also guide and oversee
implementation of the RINR. This has implications not only for the operational structure as
the Secretariat will need to be recalibrated and restructured to meet the current needs. As
expectations from member States increase towards the ability of the ICGLR to deliver, it
requires a high level of coordination between member States and the ICGLR Secretariat for
an effective outcome and coherent implementation on the ground. The ICGLR Secretariat
needs to attribute paramount importance to the RINR. It should also step up and enhance
regular communication flows between the Secretariat and the member States at the national
level. The separate special unit that is envisaged with staff dedicated solely on the RINR
might be a good idea but given the political nature of the Secretariat, in order to have the buy-
in of member States, there needs to be prior approval from the relevant organs of the ICGLR
as it implies a change in the original structure.
 Multiplicity of donors within the RINR
While the growing interest of donors for the RINR is laudable, the multiplicity of
interventions at various levels requires greater ability to coordinate to obtain optimal results.
As it stands, strategic coordination of the various sources of funding might not be optimal.
 Lack of ownership by ICGLR Secretariat
Related to the previous challenge of multiplicity of donors is the lack of ownership of the
RINR by the Secretariat. Given the growing number of donors, each with their own priorities
and set of agenda, the ICGLR Secretariat might not be empowered to be effective on the
ground. With regards to management of resources, while the ICGLR Secretariat is allocated a
certain amount each year, the ICGLR Secretariat may only be able to develop tools but
necessarily to implement them.
23

There is lack of technical and human resources in the ICGLR Secretariat that are specifically
dedicated to RINR. In addition, for the Secretariat to be able to manage considerable amounts
of funds independently, it should comply with Internationally accepted Accounting Principles
which includes the use of International Accounting Standards and International Financial
Reporting Standards. Both these imply capacity development of the ICGLR Secretariat. The
self financing study that is currently being undertaken is a step in the right direction for
ownership and sustainability in the long term. The case of the Shamva project in Zimbabwe
illustrates well how a solely externally supported initiative that lacks ownership ends up
being unsustainable. (See Box 1).
Box 1: The Shamva Mining Project in Zimbabwe
The Shamva mining centre in Zimbabwe was built to provide local small-scale gold miners with
access to mechanised and more efficient minerals processing. Additional services included assistance
with blasting; advice on geology, mining methods, law, marketing and environment; and equipment
hire. The project resulted in increased productivity, safer and less environmentally damaging methods
and increased incomes for miners. While it was publicized as an example of what-to-do to facilitate
access to appropriate technology and equipment and develop mining skills of small-scale miners,
failed to operate in a sustainable manner, due to hasty disengagement of its main funding agency,
mismanagement and lack of institutional support.
Source: ECA. 2002. Compendium of Best Practices in Small Scale Mining in Africa.
http://new.uneca.org/Portals/15/CrossArticle/1/Documents/Compendium-
on_best_practices_in_smallsacle.pdf.
 Multitude of transparency initiatives on minerals in the Great Lakes region
As there are several initiatives on the ground, sometimes competing with each other since
they have the same objectives, it requires proper coordination to avoid fatigue from artisanal
small scale miners, traders and other participants in the supply chains as questionnaires,
surveys and requirements of all the initiatives could quickly become cumbersome if not well
coordinated and well managed.
 Communication on the RINR
Despite the positive image and coverage the RINR is getting, it is still relatively unknown
compared to other schemes such as the Kimberley Process or the EITI. There is need to
improve the communication on the RINR and also the monitoring of progress.
24

4 COMPARING THE RINR WITH OTHER CERTIFICATION SCHEMES
AND INITIATIVES
As discussed above, the ICGLR RINR built on previous initiatives and incorporated lessons
learned and best practices. A quick review will be made of some of these
mechanisms/initiatives in order to draw lessons learned and best practices and forge a way
forward.
4.1 The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS)
The KPCS is a joint government, industry and civil society initiative to stem the flow of
conflict diamonds, which are defined as rough diamonds used by rebel movements to finance
wars against legitimate governments. The trade in these illicit stones has fuelled conflicts in
countries such as Angola, Côte d’Ivoire, the DRC and Sierra Leone. KPCS imposes
requirements on its members to enable them to certify shipments of diamonds as ‘conflict
free’.
The KP is an import-export certification scheme which requires participating governments to
certify the origin of rough diamonds, and put in place effective controls to prevent conflict
stones from entering the supply chain. Participant countries must enact domestic legislation
to implement the scheme, and can only trade rough diamonds with other members. This
creates a strong incentive for countries that want to produce, trade, or process uncut stones to
join. The KP’s technical provisions are implemented by governments, but its tripartite
structure means that non-governmental organisations and the diamond industry hold official
status as observers and take part, along with member states, in all working groups and
decision making processes.
4.1.1 Achievements, successes and strengths of KPCS
In the past ten years, the Kimberley Process has had some notable achievements, including
pioneering a tripartite approach to solving international problems, and helping some of the
countries that were worst-hit by diamond-fuelled wars to increase their official diamond
revenues. The UN General Assembly 64th session Resolution notes that the implementation
of the KPCS has had a positive impact in reducing the opportunity for conflict diamonds to
play a role in fuelling armed conflict. It further notes that the KPCS would help to protect
legitimate trade and ensure that the effective implementation of the relevant resolutions on
trade in conflict diamonds.12
The Kimberley Process has been successful in addressing some issues regarding participant
non-compliance with the KPCS. Most significant is the case of the Republic of Congo
(ROC), which was removed from the KP in 2004 after a review mission, concluded that the
country was not complying with KPCS minimum requirements. In 2007, after re-establishing
and demonstrating compliance, the ROC was readmitted to the KP.
12U.N. General Assembly, 64th Session. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly. 64/109 The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to
prevention and settlement of conflicts (A/RES/64/109) http://www.un.org/depts/dhl/resguide/r64.shtml.
25

According to Shawn Blore and Ian Smillie (one of the first researchers to document the
existence of conflict diamonds and a participant in the original KP negotiation process who is
now one of the most vocal critics of the KPCS), “The KP is the most extensive and – despite
certain significant shortcomings – the most successful system currently in place for certifying
the origins of high value natural resources, and the only scheme in place with a track record
of addressing conflict situations.” 13 At the most basic level, the fact that the KPCS exists at all
is its greatest strength.
Another strength of the KPCS is the stipulation that participants can only engage in rough
diamond trade with other KP participants. Any country with a rough diamond business
(production, trade, or consumption) must, almost of necessity, join the KP so that its diamond
business can continue to function. Additionally, once a state becomes a KP participant, it is
bound by the KPCS rules. Nearly every country that has joined the KP has had to pass new
laws in order to meet the KPCS minimum standards and enforce the KPCS at home.
Although the KPCS itself is not a legally binding international treaty, its enforceability is
actually enhanced by the fact that each participant has made its provisions legally binding
within its own borders. One of the greatest strengths of the KP is that it can evolve. At each
annual plenary, participants can discuss and make changes to how the KP works. This is
beneficial because it allows the KP to address its weaknesses and improve its effectiveness.
4.1.2 Challenges and weaknesses of KPCS
The Global Witness (2006), while acknowledging the fact that KPCS controls have reduced
significantly the market for illicit diamonds, notes that in Côte d’Ivoire, the revenue from
diamond production had provided income to rebel movements. There is also strong evidence
that diamonds from Liberia, which remained under UN sanction, were being smuggled into
bordering Kimberly participant countries. Serious problems in the DRC were also reported.14
In addition, member governments have repeatedly failed to deal effectively with problem
cases such as Zimbabwe, Côte d’Ivoire and Venezuela. Despite the existence of the
Kimberley Process, diamonds are still fuelling violence and human rights abuses. Although
the scheme makes it more difficult for diamonds from rebel-held areas to reach international
markets, there are still significant weaknesses in the scheme that undermine its effectiveness
and allow the trade in blood diamonds to continue. The KP’s definition of “conflict diamond”
leaves out several important factors. Conflict diamonds, according to the KP, are rough
diamonds used by rebel movements or their allies to finance conflict aimed at undermining
legitimate governments. This definition has two critical flaws: the focus on who is doing the
violence and the focus on rough diamonds. The fact that a diamond is only a conflict
diamond if it is used by rebel groups or their allies does not account for government-
sponsored violence that is financed by diamonds. Second, the definition of conflict diamonds
only mentions rough diamonds, not cut and polished ones. This loophole creates the
possibility that conflict diamonds could still reach the international market after they have
been cut and polished.
13 Blore, Shawn and Smilie, Ian. 2010. An ICGLR-based tracking and certification for minerals based in the
Great Lakes Region of Central Africa. March.
14Global Witness, 2006, ‘An Independent Commissioned Review Evaluating the Effectiveness of the Kimberley Process’,
Global Witness
http://www.globalwitness.org/media_library_get.php/272/1277890630/GW%20Commissioned%20Report%20on%20KP.pd
f.
26

Consensus based decision-making is another weakness of the KP. It means that any state can
veto decisions with which they disagree. While it may lend legitimacy to decisions and
reduces major disagreements, decisions made by consensus often represent the lowest
common denominator. Another weakness of the KPCS is that it does not have a ‘house’. The
current rotating system of KP Chairs undermines the continuity and follow-up on issues as
well as sustainability. Internal controls are also among the weaknesses of the KPCS.
Although the KPCS requires participants to establish a system of internal controls designed to
eliminate the importing or exporting of conflict diamonds, what these internal controls should
consist of is not explicitly stated. Instead, the KPCS has recommendations that participants
are encouraged to follow when creating their internal controls. This can result in extremely
weak internal controls. Finally, although the KP has provisions that require countries to face
penalties for noncompliance, decisions about penalties for noncompliance are generally ad
hoc rather than based on a predetermined set of rules that delineates which penalties should
be given for different levels of noncompliance. Furthermore, because KP decisions are made
by consensus, penalties for noncompliance can be blocked by political allies of noncompliant
participants, allowing them to entirely escape accountability for their infractions.
4.1.3 Lessons learned from KPCS
One of the major lessons learned from the KPCS is that there is need to have a clear purpose
besides a short term focus on conflict. The linkages between natural resources, conflict and
wider governance and human rights issues should be addressed simultaneously for a better
impact and outcome. Another lesson learned is that the system should be flexible enough to
adapt to new conditions that were unforeseen at the time the KPCS was conceived.
With regards to administration, the main lessons learned are the need for more rigorous
internal controls and for tracking to cover the entire supply chain, from mine site to end user.
In addition, decision-making should be open, inclusive and free of political interference as
transparency is vital for building trust and for credibility. The need for a Secretariat is also
another lesson learned as not having one implies weak administration, poor data collection,
poor management and research. However, a top-down management will also make the system
cumbersome so there is need to find a solution in the middle.
Concerning operations, there is need to make sure that the areas where production is taking
place is free from any ‘conflict’ activity, including rebels, militias, or government sponsored
military activities. The need to track from mine site is reiterated and the need for data starting
from production at mine sites and trade figures cannot be overemphasized. Another lesson
learned is the importance of an independent third-party auditing, including supply chain
monitoring. There is also need for credible sanctions for non-compliance. Sanctions should
include de-certification. Without this sanction, there is no incentive to follow the rules, and
system will not function.
27

4.2 The OECD Due Diligence Guidance
The OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chain Management of Minerals
for Conflict Affected and High Risk Areas provides good practice guidelines to businesses
from OECD member States operating in conflict areas. The objective of the guidance is to
help companies respect human rights and avoid contributing to conflict through their mineral
sourcing practices. The Guidance is also intended to support transparency in mineral supply
chains and sustainable corporate engagement in the mineral sector with a view to enabling
countries to benefit from their natural mineral resources and prevent the extraction and trade
of minerals from being a source of conflict, human rights abuses, and insecurity.15 It covers
the three Ts (tin, tantalum and tungsten) and gold. The Five-Step Framework was also
incorporated into UNSC1952/2010 on DRC. It is applicable for any upstream and
downstream company “sourcing minerals or metals from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas, and is intended to cultivate transparent, conflict-free supply chains and sustainable
corporate engagement in the minerals sector”.16
Integration of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance in companies supply chain management
systems will enable downstream users to source from conflict-affected and high risk areas
(and in particular the Great Lakes Region) knowing that due diligence has been conducted in
line with recommendations developed through a multi-stakeholder process. Downstream
companies are not required to map the factual circumstances of the upstream supply chain,
but the Guidance does ask them to identify the smelters in their supply chain and evaluate
their due diligence practices to ensure they are in line with the recommendations in the
OECD Guidance. Conformance with the OECD Due Diligence Guidance means that
operators sourcing from conflict-affected and high-risk areas have instituted management
systems, identified and mitigated conflict and (the most serious) human rights risks and that
smelters have been audited on their performance and reported on this regularly. The
Guidance’s focus is primarily on risks such as human rights abuses and conflict, as stipulated
in its 3Ts supplement while the Gold Supplement also encourages upstream companies that
are carrying out Step 2 (identifying and assessing risks in the supply chain) to “map the
factual circumstances” of present and possible risks.
The OECD Due Diligence Guidance is non-binding and has been endorsed, by 34 OECD
countries plus Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Lithuania, Latvia, Morocco and Romania, the 11
ICGLR countries and the UN Security Council in two Resolutions on DRC. In addition to
being endorsed by the ICGLR Heads of State, the Due Diligence Guidance
Recommendations have been integrated into the Government of DRC’s legal framework and
the other ICGLR States are set to follow DRC’s lead. Country adherents to the downstream
recommendations commit to “actively promote the observance of the Guidance by companies
operating in or from their territories and sourcing minerals from conflict-affected or high-risk
areas”, and “take measures to actively support the integration into corporate management
systems” of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance. However, the implementation of OECD
Due Diligence Guidance is conducted on a voluntary basis for most countries, and companies
are not obliged to implement it.
15 The OECD Due Diligence Guidelines for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Afflicted and High Risk
Areas, http://www.oecd.org/document/36/0,3746,en_2649_34889_44307940_1_1_1_1,00.html.
16 OECD 2011, p. 52.
28

Adhering countries are expected to promote its observance in companies operating in or from
their territories and sourcing minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas. In addition,
companies operating in countries which are not signatories are also choosing to implement it,
according to the OECD; for example, about 15% of the downstream participating companies
are based outside of OECD member countries, including companies headquartered in
China.17
4.3 The Dodd-Frank Act
The Dodd Frank Act, which was signed into law by President Obama on 21 July 2010, is a
set of a comprehensive financial regulatory reform bill entitled the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act (“Dodd-Frank”). It represents an act of good faith of a
home country government to improve transparency. A provision on conflict minerals is
contained in Section 1502 of the Act and imposes legal obligations with regard to due
diligence measures by companies that trade on US Exchanges and are implicated in the
supply-chains of tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold, the four main metals extracted from eastern
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) or an adjoining country ores. Companies must report
to the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on the due diligence conducted on the
source and chain of custody of these ‘conflict minerals’, provide an independent audit of this
report, and make further information available such as “description of the facilities used to
process the minerals, country of origin and the efforts to determine the mine or location of
origin with the greatest possible specificity.” All requested information must be published on
the company’s website. The SEC’s rules on how to apply section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank
Act were finalized on 22nd August 2012.
The Dodd-Frank Act was introduced as a way of ensuring greater transparency. It is a
forceful signal to all companies operating in the area that they have to be very transparent
about their dealings regarding ‘conflict minerals’ in DRC and neighboring countries. One of
the main criticism of the Dodd-Frank Act is that it has eliminated legitimate trade in the DRC
and neighbouring countries, given that the burden placed upon the industry to comply to the
Act has effectively acted as a de-facto embargo on minerals from the region.18
Notwithstanding their good intention, in enacting legislative measures such as the Dodd-
Frank Act, it is important that home countries have a complete understanding of the potential
impacts (positive and negative) and unintended consequences of the implementation of these
measures; deploy necessary resources to help host countries build the necessary capacity and
enforce the measures, as well as alleviate the negative impacts.
4.4 The Fairtrade and Fairmined (FT/FM) standard for gold from ASM
The Fairtrade/Fairmined Standard ( FT/FM) was first published by the Alliance for
Responsible Mining (ARM) and the Fairtrade Labelling Organization (FLO) in March 2010.
The FT/FM) for artisanal gold allows gold to be judged as ‘sustainable’.
17 OECD 2011c. In addition, Brazil, Malaysia and the 11 countries of the Great Lakes Region actively
participated in the OECD-ICGLR joint consultation. The ICGLR endorsed the Guidance after the Nairobi
meeting in September 2010. Please see OECD, 2010 for more details.
18Weiss, Paul, “the Dodd-Frank Act Requirements Relating to Conflict Minerals and Mining and Resource
Extraction Companies”, September 2010, http://www.paulweiss.com/files/upload/27Sep10CM.pdf.
29

The vision for FT/FM, in harmonization with that of the Alliance for Responsible Mining, is
for “ASM to be a formalised, organised and profitable activity that is technologically
efficient, socially and environmentally responsible; the sector’s development takes place
within a framework of good governance, legality, participation and respect for diversity; it
seeks to make an increasing contribution to improved workplace conditions, local
development, poverty reduction and social justice within … countries, stimulated by growing
consumer demand for sustainable minerals and ethical jewellery”.19 The Fairtrade and
Fairmined standard gives miners clear guidance on what labour, organisational,
environmental and traceability requirements they have to fulfil for their metals to be
considered as Fairtrade and Fairmined. In return, the miners are guaranteed a fair price for
their gold and they receive the Fairtrade premium of 10% (15% for Ecological Gold extracted
without the use of toxic chemicals), which is to be reinvested in improving their businesses
and social development. 20
The FT/FM Standard is for use by artisanal and small-scale gold producers only and is
presently only applicable to Latin America; however, programmes are being developed in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Currently, mines in Peru, Colombia and Bolivia are certified with the
FT/FM Standard. This includes sourcing from conflict-affected zones in Colombia. The
FT/FM gold Standard “is designed to cover only existing, conflict free, community based,
permanent and seasonal ASM.” While it was not expressly designed for carrying out chain of
custody of conflict minerals supply chains, it does allow operators to work in conflict-
affected areas provided they comply with minimum performance criteria relating to the
principle that “the Standard will not support organizations involved with armed conflict in
any way, including financing conflict or the use of revenue to engage in activities that
facilitate the purchasing of arms.”21 It is expressly oriented at improving the development
gains for communities where gold is mined artisanally.22 The ARM/FLO environmental
standards are more rigorous than those of any other Standard oriented at ASM.
Despite some critiques that the FT/FM standards are not detailed or comprehensive, it is
vitally important to note that the FT/FM standard goes beyond any other standard that seeks
to support artisanal and small-scale miners to mine in ways that is not only responsible but
developmental. However, it is unlikely that a majority of artisanal gold miners will ever be
able to achieve FT/FM certification as it sets a very high standard which requires
formalization and enabling market and legal frameworks. That said efforts are emerging to
support the Artisanal and Small-scale Gold Mining (AGSM) sector’s move towards models
of production and trade that are closer to FT/FM’s performance criteria in a quest for
continual improvement of the ASGM sector. ARM and FLO have ambitious plans to increase
the supply of Fairtrade gold to 300 kg by the end of 2011, partly through trebling the number
of certified producer organizations to nine. Gold miners in the DRC and the Great Lakes
Region could soon be FT/FM certified, as ARM, Solidaridad and Fairtrade are working to
bring miners in Kenya, Tanzania, Ghana and Uganda to compliance and exploring
opportunities in Mongolia and West Africa. Whilst FT/FM gold is primarily available in the
jewellery market, it is entirely conceivable that ICT sector companies that wished to promote
the ethical credentials of a product might be permitted by FLO and ARM to use FT/FM gold
in products and label them as such.
19 The FairTrade Labelling Organization and the Alliance for Responsible Mining, 2010, p. 4
20 Alliance for Responsible Mining. Annual report. 2010.
21 ARM/FLO 2010.
22 The Fair Trade Foundation and the Alliance for Responsible Mining, 2010. Fair Trade Foundation and
Alliance for Responsible Mining, 2010, p. 12.
30

Depending on the partnership resource, market demand and opportunities to work with
artisanal and small scale miners producing other products, ARM/FLO would consider
development of additional standards beyond gold. Pending interest from the tin, tantalum and
tungsten industry and the ICT sector, the development of FT/FM standards – and eventually
mines and trading chains - for the 3Ts could be possible, especially further to ARM and the
Fair Trade International Standards Unit’s recent announcement that the ARM/FLO standard
will be undergoing review in 2012 with a specific objective of developing “a more generic
system to facilitate standards development of ASM of other minerals in the future.”23
4.5 The World Gold Council Conflict-free Gold (CFG) standard
The World Gold Council (WGC) is the market development organization for the gold
industry. Working within the investment, jewellery and technology sectors, as well as
engaging in government affairs, the World Gold Council’s purpose is to provide industry
leadership, whilst stimulating and sustaining demand for gold. Based in the UK with
operations in India, the Far East, Europe and the US, the World Gold Council is an
association whose 24 members comprise the world’s leading gold mining companies,
representing about 70% of global corporate gold production. WGC wishes to contribute to the
exclusion of gold that fuels conflict from the market whilst working from the premise that
“disinvestment or withdrawal by responsible operators may make it more difficult to stabilise
a conflict situation or to achieve post-conflict reconstruction”.24 The Conflict free gold
standard is designed to be applicable to armed conflicts globally and responds both to the
requirements of Section 1502 of the US Dodd-Frank Act and of the emerging OECD gold
supplement to their Guidance on the Responsible Sourcing of Minerals from Conflict-
Affected and High Risk Areas.
4.5.1 Achievements25
The World Gold Council published the Conflict-Free Gold Standard in October 2012, the
culmination of almost three years work involving leading gold miners and refiners and an
intensive and innovative consultative process across five continents and involving over 100
stakeholder organisations. Two of the eight roundtables were held in Africa – one in
Johannesburg under the auspices of the South African Institute of International Affairs and
one in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, jointly hosted with the ICGLR and GIZ. Thus, unlike with
Dodd-Frank (and to an extent the OECD process) there has been substantive African
involvement in developing the Standard. Moreover, unlike the US legislation, the Conflict-
Free Gold Standard is global in scope rather than focusing on and, in the eyes of some,
stigmatizing African minerals. It is early days to comment on success, since implementation
will not start until January 2013. However, a significant achievement is the support that the
World Gold Council and its Members have been able to secure for the Standard from
governments, the gold supply chain and civil society. All have been involved in its
development and have welcomed the Standard’s introduction, believing it to be credible and
workable. The Standard is based on well-respected, international benchmarks like the UN
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
23 Fairtrade Labelling Organization and the Alliance for Reponsible Mining, 2012.
24 Chatham House, 2011.
25 Received from World Gold Council, Corporate Communications. December 2012.
31

Importantly, the Standard has not been developed in isolation from other initiatives but links
with them. Notably, it is intended to act as an ‘industry programme’ to operationalise the
OECD’s Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-
Affected and High-Risk Areas, and it has been developed to ensure it is complementary to
other industry-led initiatives, such as the London Bullion Market Association’s (LBMA’s)
Responsible Gold Guidance. Thus the Standard is a means by which gold miners operating in
a conflict-affected or high risk area can reassure local, national and international stakeholders
that they are operating responsibly and provide the foundation for the due diligence that
refiners will need to conduct on their gold supplies.
4.5.2 Success criteria
The key success criteria will be the progressive elimination from the supply chain of gold of
gold that fuels conflict or funds illegal armed groups. By following the Standard, gold miners
can assess their operations and provide assurance that they do not cause, support or benefit
unlawful armed conflict, nor contribute to serious human rights abuses, or breaches of
international humanitarian law. The Standard is designed to increase trust and transparency in
the gold supply chain, and provides confidence that responsibly undertaken gold mining is an
important source of social and economic development. Implementing companies will be
required to report on their implementation and these disclosures will be subject to
independent assurance. All of the World Gold Council Members have committed to the
implementation of the Standard.
Although the Standard is, in principle, available for use by any gold mining entity, in reality
its requirements are likely to be challenging for most ASM groups. However, given the
importance of mines working in the formal sector for newly-mined gold supply, being able to
provide assurance that these large-scale operations are not fuelling conflict or funding illegal
armed groups is a significant gain in maximising the proportion of gold production that can
be shown to be ‘conflict free’. This may, in turn, help to underpin new investment since it is
essential for any producer, looking to operate a mine in a high risk or conflict-affected zone,
to be able to satisfy the due diligence requirements of downstream producers.
4.5.3 Challenges
The gold supply chain is uniquely complex and diverse, with gold mined in over 90
countries, on a variety of scales from large professional mines, to small groups mining
artisanally. Moreover, recycled gold accounts for over a third of global gold supply and has
an important ongoing role to play in the gold supply chain. Gold’s high value and portability
also make it susceptible to smuggling. This complexity brings challenges with it.
Once gold is delivered to a refinery, the refiner will typically mix gold from a number of
different sources, making it impossible thereafter to trace the source of specific
consignments. Statements provided by the mine operator that demonstrate conformance with
the Conflict-Free Gold Standard can be used by refiners as part of their due diligence
practices. Refiners that know with certainty that all the gold entering the refinery can be
shown to be ‘conflict-free’ can be assured that all gold leaving the refinery is ‘conflict-free’.
This is the approach taken by the London Bullion Market Association’s Responsible Gold
Guidance and other industry-led approaches that cover gold refiners.
32

All the initiatives to improve the traceability of gold and to require complex due diligence
will also increasingly raise the bar which ASM producers will have to surmount if they are to
continue to have access to the mainstream gold market. The danger exists that this production
will increasingly be diverted in to informal or illegal channels. Which is why, in the case of
the DRC, the World Gold Council is working with others through the Public-Partnership
Alliance, to support projects to prevent the marginalisation of legitimate ASM producers and
to promote increasing formalisation within a properly defined legal framework.
4.6 The ITRI Tin Supply Chan Initiative (iTSCi)
The ITRI Tin Supply Chan Initiative (iTSCi) is a joint initiative between ITRI and the
Tantalum-Niobium International Study Centre (TIC). It was initiated in 2009 and first piloted
in DRC (North and South Kivu) in 2010. It encompasses large, medium and small
enterprises, co-operatives and artisanal mine sites. “It is designed for use by industry, but
with oversight and clear roles for government officials.”26 It “takes into account the
recommendations of the UN Security Council (UNSC), in particular the Group of Experts of
the DRC (UNGoE) to expand due diligence to include criminal networks, as well as armed
groups and to include violations of the asset freeze and travel ban on sanctioned individuals
and entities.” iTSCi covers tin, tantalum and tungsten, but not gold and treats the OECD Due
Diligence Guidance as one of its normative documents.
iTSCi is a chain of custody and due diligence system that includes independent and third
party risk assessment and independent third party audits for protection against human rights
abuses including the worst forms of child labour.” iTSCi envisages including “additional
social and environmental standards relating to the process and production methods for pre-
smelter mineral extraction processing and trade … at a later stage.” iTSCi’s policy stresses
that minerals mined in protected areas cannot be included in the scheme, without however
offering a method of verification. A number of stakeholders has welcomed the scheme
including public officials participating in its implementation as they were able to accomplish
their tasks better due to the capacity and relationship building that is undertaken in the
context of iTSCi.
The positive impact of iTSCi is documented in the 2011 report of the UN GoE: “The
Initiative has also helped to build Democratic Republic of the Congo Government capacity in
the mining sector, to safeguard the livelihoods of miners at tagged mining sites and,
according to some North Katanga civil society activists, to reduce corruption among State
officials in the mining sector.” iTSCi works through the operationalization of three
components: (1) Chain of custody tagging and monitoring of mineral origin, (2) Independent
third-party risk assessment of mine sites, transportation routes, companies and the macro-
level situation to identify and manage conflict-related risks, and (3) Independent third-party
audit of all operators joining iTSCi, operators such as ASM who cannot become iTSCi
members, and also the system data.
26 ITRI, 2012. “itSCi”. [Webpage.]
https://www.itri.co.uk/index.php?option=com_zoo&view=frontpage&Itemid
33

4.6.1 Challenges
There is a gap between demand for iTSCi and the initiative’s capacity to rapidly scale up its
operations. iTSCi identified in early 2011 that “limited funding, huge capacity building
needs, the geographical and logistical challenge posed by the location of mine sites, the
inadequacy of local infrastructure (e.g. electricity and telephone black-outs) in DRC” as the
major constraints. iTSCi is the programme preferred by upstream supply chain actors in that
it provides a Chain of Custody assurance of the 3Ts in line with what is required under the
OECD Diligence Guidance and initiatives such as the CFS for the ASM sector. However,
until iTSCi is able to expand throughout the entire region, or the ICGLR’s Regional
Certification Mechanism (RCM) is properly rolled out, tin, tantalum and tungsten miners
around the Great Lakes Region will have few options but to market their minerals either for
far inferior prices to buyers whose downstream supply chain is not oriented at countries
requiring supply chain due diligence, or through fraud and smuggling.
iTSCi’s development has been overseen by international actors, but local actors such as
comptoir and negociant associations and local, provincial and national authorities have had
important roles in determining how it would work. Local organizations are responsible for
implementation in DRC and in Rwanda with Pact (an iNGO) and Channel Research (iTSCi’s
independent third-party Risk Assessor and Auditor) providing support. Government officials
have an important role in the process in that they are the ones carrying out the tagging, and
logging of the data. Local and provincial level stakeholder committees (comités de pilotage)
also have major roles to ensure that the initiative is implemented in a way that is sustainable
and realistic taking into consideration the operating environment.
4.7 BGR’s Certified Trading Chains (CTC) and analytical fingerprint
technology
The Certified Trading Chains (CTC) scheme of the German Federal Institute for Geosciences
and Natural Resources (BGR) was developed in 2008 and then piloted at a number of larger
mines in Rwanda in September 2009 by BGR and the Rwanda Geology and Mines Authority.
Mine sites certified as “CTC-compliant” under the CTC scheme can be judged as ‘ethical’
and towards ‘sustainable.’ It is more in keeping with triple bottom line expectations because
it incorporates more social and environmental considerations than the OECD Due Diligence
Guidance or iTSCi. The CTC system is government led, in cooperation with national
authorities, Rwanda and DRC. The process has involved input from multiple stakeholder
groups, bringing perspectives from different geographies, scales, supply chain tiers and
sectors. CTC can be applied to tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold supply chains and is presently
being implemented only in Rwanda and DRC under a co operation agreement between each
of these governments and the government of Germany.
CTC aims to improve “supply chain due diligence and good governance in the artisanal and
small-scale mining sector” in Rwanda and DRC. CTC contains “twenty certification
standards on mineral origin and traceability, mining conditions, and supply chain due
diligence elements based on OECD and other integrity instruments, adapted to practical
applicability within the central African ASM”. 27
27 BGR, 2011a, p. 1.
34

Whereas iTSCi, the OECD Due Diligence Guidance and Conflict-free Smelter are concerned
with chain of custody and risk management of the most serious human rights abuses and
benefits to illegal armed groups, CTC also considers labour and working conditions, the
behaviour of security forces, community consultation and development and environmental
protection.
BGR has also developed an analytical fingerprint (AFP) technology that is “a combination of
analytical evaluation methods to independently track the origin of tantalum (coltan) ore
concentrates produced in Central Africa.”This analytical fingerprint is an optional exercise to
verify chain of custody and is envisaged to be integrated into the International Conference on
the Great Lakes’ Region’s (ICGLR) Regional Certification Mechanism (RCM). The AFP is
very useful for downstream users who wish to confirm that their minerals are conflict-free as
it allows for positive mineralogical confirmation of origin for mines where BGR has been
able to gain a sample. However, the cost of using the technology means its application is
intended for extraordinary circumstances, rather than as a normal course of action.
BGR has worked closely with ICGLR to incorporate CTC and AFP into their Regional
Certification Mechanism. This means that all mineral supply chains across the Great Lakes
Region for the 3TG will need to conform to CTC standards embedded in RCM and classified
as red or yellow flag indicators by ICGLR, if they are to receive ICGLR export certificate.
However, other CTC standards (on environment, working conditions and community
development) have been classified as “Progress Criteria” by ICGLR and will hence simply be
monitored, rather than enforced through ICGLR RCM. According to BGR, three CTC
compliant mines in Rwanda will be part of an ICGLR pilot in 2012.
4.8 Conflict-Free Smelter Program (CFS)
The Conflict-Free Smelter Program (CFS) “is a voluntary program in which an independent
third party evaluates a smelter’s procurement activities and determines if the smelter
demonstrated that all the materials they processed originated from DRC conflict-free
sources.”28 The CFS was developed by the Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC)
and the Global e- Sustainability Initiative (GeSI) in 2009. The CFS is global in scope, and
can be applied to smelters and refiners all over the world. The CFS is being progressively
implemented across tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold smelters and refiners, and some
supportive documents are in development. CFS audits have already been conducted.
It is primarily an audit that verifies the origin of a smelter’s input streams and includes a mass
balance calculation to ensure inputs, outputs and stocks balance (taking into account a 10%
margin for loss/gain of mass). Where the minerals have been sourced from or passed through
specific countries (e.g., those of the Great Lakes Region or where there is evidence of
smuggling or transit of conflict mineral), the CFS auditor must verify that the smelter or
refiner demonstrates they conform to the OECD Due Diligence Guidance, and that the
smelter has suitably responded to any identified risk that the minerals may have contributed
to conflict in DRC.
28 EICC and GeSI, 2011c. EICC®-GeSI Conflict-Free Smelter (CFS) tools and resources.
www.conflictfreesmelter.org/.
35

Smelters can show conformance with the OECD Due Diligence Guidance either by
individually having their sources assessed against the Guidance by an independent third party
or by using an assessed-conformance scheme, such as iTSCi, to do this for them.
The CFS seeks to provide companies with a method to comply with the Dodd-Frank Act. The
CFS interprets Dodd Frank Act requirements in a conservative manner to work with the
scenario that the SEC is working in absolute to deliver ‘conflict-free’ minerals rather than
‘conflict-managed’ ones. Consequently, in so far as the OECD is not yet aligned with the
Dodd-Frank Act, there remain issues of compliance to the Dodd-Frank Act that are not
compatible with the OECD Due Diligence Guidance, thus preventing full harmony.
4.9 The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
The negative impacts of resource abundance on growth and sustainable development in
general have been dealt with in depth and width in academia, policy circles and increasingly
also in civil society campaigns since Auty presented the resource curse thesis in 1993. In
parallel, transparency and the notion of multi-stakeholder governance have evolved to global
norms setting the normative context of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI). The EITI was announced 2002 by the British government at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development in Johannesburg. The EITI sets a standard for transparency
requiring its participants to disclose revenues generated in oil, gas and mining. This applies
both to the operating companies’ payments to national governments as well as to
governments’ revenues received from the respective extractive industries. The two data sets
can then be compared and assessed in terms of their congruity588. Revealing discrepancies in
the numbers identify possible corruption. By eliminating traditional obscurity in financial
transactions in the oil, gas and mining sector the EITI seeks to deprive public officials and
private business of the possibility to further engage in corrupt practices. Subsequently – in
theory – financial resources that would have been wasted through non transparent avenues
and acts of corruption now can potentially be used to enhance sustainable development.
It is not easy to capture fully the impact of EITI. The potential of transparency as an
instrument to reduce corruption has been subject to debate. The EITI not only emerged in
parallel to other sustainability governance schemes in the mineral resource sector such as the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. The Kimberley Process initially even served as a
blueprint when designing the EITI. The EITI differs from the Kimberley Process in the sense
that the EITI targets developmental objectives beyond purely security related issues.
The EITI, which was launched in 2002, aims to strengthen governance by improving
transparency and accountability in the extractive sector. The EITI is a coalition of
governments, companies, civil society groups, investors and international organizations. EITI
developed a standard for monitoring which is verified through a validation process. EITI is a
voluntary process and EITI compliance is monitored by the global civil society coalition
Publish What You Pay (PWYP). PWYP campaigns for transparency in the payment, receipt
and management of revenues from the oil, gas and mining industries.
36

Opinions expressed by a number of stakeholders suggest that the EITI has had a positive
impact. According to the EITI Secretariat, in Liberia, EITI is seen as a strong indication that
the government is committed to accountability and through the EITI process suspicion and
mistrust are being reduced. In Nigeria, EITI is perceived as both an instigator of civic
interrogation of public servants and as curbing social unrest as it directed youthful energies
from resorting to violence to engaging in public debate. In Cameroon, it has helped improve
the management and monitoring capacity of the relevant government agencies and in Gabon,
it has provided a platform for civil society to point at challenges in the development and
management of natural resources. In Ghana, it has helped local communities to engage with
companies involved in natural resource extraction.29
However, governance indicators do not show a clear improvement in EITI countries as
opposed to non-EITI countries for corruption perception, while there is improvement in
business climate and voice and accountability.30
29 EITI, 2010, Impact of EITI in Africa: Stories from the ground’ EITI Secretariat.
http://eiti.org/files/EITI%20Impact%20in%20Africa.pdf.
30 Aaronson S., 2008, ‘Can Transparency in Extractive Industries Break the Resource Curse?’ VoxEU.org
http://voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/1395.
37

5 CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD
Certification Main features Main implementers Good practices
mechanism/
Initiative
1. ICGLR RCM 1. Chain of custody tracking from 1. Member States; Burden of proof falls primarily
mine site to export. 2. ICGLR ; harmonized with on exporters, secondly on
2. Regional tracking of mineral flows national-level Governments, in order to
via ICGLR database. databases; place less
3. Regular independent third-party 3. An ICGLR- demands on resource-
audits. supported/sanctioned tripartite stretched governments in the
4. Independent mineral chain auditor Audit Committee oversees the GLR; Mandatory third-party
(IMCA). region’s audits audits,
(pool of accredited auditors; applying the trust, but check
ToRs for audits; receives and principle; Adapt current
reviews audit reports, etc.); systems
4. IMCA political backing and ; and 5) Design for
admin support of ICGLR, but adaptability, so that
independent the mechanism stays present
with time and incorporates
relevant and best practice
standards as much as possible
2. Kimberley Multi-partner initiative (Government, Governments tripartite approach;
Process CSOs, Industry) Can only trade with another
Primarily addressing conflict KP member; evolving;
diamonds
3. OECD Due 5 steps: Companies (upstream and Enhance transparency in the
Diligence 1. Management systems, downstream) entire supply chain
Guidance 2. Risk assessment,
3. Risk mitigation,
4. Independent third-party audits,
5. Annual reporting.
4. Dodd-Frank Act Section 1502 Imposes legal Companies registered with SEC Ensuring greater transparency
obligations on due diligence on dealings with conflict
measures on companies that trade on minerals emanating DRC and
US exchanges for the 3TGs from DRC neighbouring countries
and adjoining countries
5. FairTrade/ Fair Allows artisanal gold to be labelled ASM Rigorous environmental
Mined ASM Gold ‘sustainable’’; labour, organisational, standards; oriented towards
environmental and traceability improving development gains
requirements for ASM communities
6. World Gold 1. Supports responsible mining WGC members and other substantive African
Council’s Conflict practices.198 companies involved in the involvement in developing the
Free Gold 2. Oriented at complying with Section extraction of gold. Standard; is global in scope
1502 of DFA. rather than focusing on
standard
3. In line with the OECD DDG, African minerals; links with
standards in development on how other industry led initiatives
companies should (OECD Guidance, etc)
commission a third-party audit and
handle recycled gold.
7. ITRI’s iTSCi 1. Combined tracking/tracing Upstream companies (from Government officials are the
(through bag tagging, documentation, mine to smelter) and national ones carrying out the tagging,
38

and data management governments supported by iTSCi and logging of the data. Local
and analysis), Programme Operators. and provincial level
2. Independent third-party risk stakeholder committees also
assessment, have major roles to ensure
3. Independent third-party audits, that the initiative is
4. Publication of findings of risk implemented in a way that is
assessments and audits sustainable and realistic
8. BGR’s Certified Third party assurance of “trading Mining companies with Includes 5 principles:
Trading Chains chain traceability, transparency, and government support traceability; fair working
the ethical quality of conditions, Security and
mineral production” human rights; community
Standards organized into 5 universal development; environment.
principles but to be customized to the Development of the Analytical
particularities of different national Fingerprinting technology
contexts.
9. Conflict free CFS is an audit that does: Primary and Secondary Smelters Downstream entities – from
Smelter program 1) Material analysis 2) Business and Refiners local exporter to End user
(CFS) process review (demonstration of
management systems, e.g., conflict
minerals policy, 100% documentation
of chain of custody; and reasonable
identification of origin).
10.EITI Coalition of governments, civil Governments and Companies Improved governance through
society, investors, industry capacity building ,
representatives and international management and monitoring;
organisations; civic engagement in natural
Has a monitoring system; resource management;
Concentrates on revenue flows engagement of local
communities and mining
companies
As can be seen from this table, while the ICGLR RINR has positively built on other existing
mechanisms and has for the most part incorporated some of the lessons learned, it can still
draw from the best practices of other initiatives. To address sustainable development issues, it
should for instance integrate the CTC scheme and the FT/MN which have higher
environmental and working conditions standards, like it is already doing with CTC but
extended to all countries of the ICGLR.
The tripartite approach pioneered by the Kimberley process is also a good practice to emulate
and the ICGLR RINR should use CSOs more systematically. In that regard, the set up of a
whistle blowing mechanisms where CSOs will play a big role is a welcome initiative that we
think will be very successful if handled well.
A way forward for ICGLR RINR will be to review its operational structure and undertake
some recalibrating and retooling including developing and increasing capacity at all levels to
address the challenges of actually implementing some of the activities on the ground; have a
strategy and a clear action plan how to use the resources allocated from the various donors to
enable better coordination; seriously consider self financing schemes to have stronger
ownership of the Initiative and for its sustainability; continue working very closely with
already existing mechanisms and proactively integrate them into the Initiative to avoid
39

duplication of efforts and resources and to surmount the perceived ‘’certification fatigue’’
from a number of stakeholders; and substantially improve communication on the RINR to
make it an internationally renowned initiative like the Kimberley Process and the EITI. More
specifically, the ICGLR should give more importance to the RINR; it should hasten
implementation of its tools with the countries that are already ready, i.e. it should keep things
moving forward with available resources; it should quickly set up the function of the
Independent Mineral Certification Auditor as it is its novelty and will also be used for the
review of data assembled by the ICGLR database; and finally accelerate the rate of
communication with the member States and acquire a means to regularly communicate with
them at the national level.
40

6 REFERENCES
Aaronson S., 2008, ‘Can Transparency in Extractive Industries Break the Resource Curse?’
VoxEU.org http://voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/1395.
Alliance for Responsible Mining. Annual report. 2010.
Alliance for Responsible Mining, 2010. Fairtrade and Fairmined Gold: Information for
business and designers. At www.fairtrade.org.uk/press_office/default.aspx.
Alliance for Responsible Mining, 2011. About us.
www.communitymining.org/index.php/en/about-us.
A.T. Kearney. 2012. Conflict Minerals: Yet Another Supply Chain Challenge. June.
http://www.atkearney.com/paper/-/asset_publisher/dVxv4Hz2h8bS/content/conflict-minerals-
yet-another-supply-chain-challenge/10192.
BGR, 2010. Analytical fingerprint (AFP) for tantalum (“coltan”), tin, and tungsten ores.
www.bgr.bund.de/EN/Themen/Min_rohstoffe/CTC/Downloads/AFP_update.pdf?__blob=pu
blicationFile&v=2.
BGR, 2011a: Newsletter 03/2011: Mineral certification: Certified Trading Chains (CTC) and
the Analytical Fingerprint (AFP).
www.bgr.bund.de/EN/Themen/Min_rohstoffe/CTC/Downloads/newsletter_03_2011.html?nn
=1572670
BGR, 2011b. The Certified Trading Chains certification system. node_en.html,.
Blore, Shawn and Smilie, Ian. 2010. An ICGLR-based tracking and certification for minerals
based in the Great Lakes Region of Central Africa. March.
Blore, Shawn and Ian Smillie, 2011. Taming the Resource Curse: Implementing the ICGLR
Certification Mechanism for conflict-prone minerals. Partnership Africa Canada.
www.pacweb.org/Documents/icglr/PAC_Report_on_ICGLR_RCM-03-2011-eng.pdf.
Chatham House, 2011. World Gold Council: Conflict-free Gold Standards. Stakeholder
Consultative Round Table, Chatham House. 15 September 2011. London: Chatham House.
EICC and GeSI, 2011c. EICC®-GeSI Conflict-Free Smelter (CFS) tools and resources.
www.conflictfreesmelter.org/.
41

EITI, 2010, Impact of EITI in Africa: Stories from the ground’ EITI Secretariat.
http://eiti.org/files/EITI%20Impact%20in%20Africa.pdf.
Fairtrade Foundation, 2012. Fairtrade Foundation to certify African gold. 13 March 2012.
Retrieved from:
www.fairtrade.org.uk/press_office/press_releases_and_statements/march_2012/fairtrade_fou
ndation_to_certify_african_gold.aspx
Fairtrade Foundation and ARM, 2011. World’s first fairtrade and fairmined certified gold to
tackle poverty faced by miners and their families. [press release.] 14 February 2011.
www.fairtrade.org.uk/press_office/press_releases_and_statements/february_2011/worlds_firs
t_fairtrade_and_fairmined_certified_gold_to_tackle_poverty_faced_by_miners_and_their_fa
milies.aspx.
Fairtrade Labelling Organization and the Alliance for Responsible Mining, 2010.Fairtrade
and Fairmined Standard for Gold from Artisanal and Small-scale Mining, Including
Associated Precious Metals. 15 March 2010.
Fairtrade Labelling Organization, 2011. Fairtrade Trade Standard, Version 01.05.2011.
www.fairtrade.net/fileadmin/user_upload/content/2011-12-29_GTS_EN.pdf.
Global Witness, 2006, ‘An Independent Commissioned Review Evaluating the Effectiveness
of the Kimberley Process’, Global Witness
http://www.globalwitness.org/media_library_get.php/272/1277890630/GW%20Commissione
d%20Report%20on%20KP.pdf.
Global Witness, 2011 Congo’s minerals trade in the balance Opportunities and obstacles to
demilitarisation
www.globalwitness.org/sites/default/files/library/Congo's%20minerals%20trade%20in%20th
e%20balance%20low%20res.pdf
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. 2006. Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region. December.
https://icglr.org/IMG/pdf/Pact_on_Security_Stability_Development-S.pdf
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. 2009. Constitutive Meeting of the
Committee against the illegal exploitation of natural resources. October.
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. 2010. Second Meeting of the Steering
Committee of the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources.
April.
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. 2010. Third Meeting of the Steering
Committee of the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources.
September.
42

International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. 2011. Fourth Meeting of the Steering
Committee of the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources.
April.
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. 2011. Fifth Meeting of the Steering
Committee of the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources.
November.
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. 2012. Sixth Meeting of the Steering
Committee of the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources.
May.
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region – The Six Tools of the RINR. Retrieved
https://icglr.org/IMG/pdf/THE_SIX_TOOLS_OF_THE_RINR.pdf
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region The ICGLR Regional Initiative against
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources (RINR) Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources in the Great Lakes Region Retrieved from https://icglr.org/spip.php?article94
International Crisis Group, 2001. Scramble for the Congo, Anatomy of an ugly war.
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 2012. Greening ICT supply chains –
Survey on conflict minerals due diligence initiatives. March.
ITRI, 2012. “itSCi”. [Webpage.]
https://www.itri.co.uk/index.php?option=com_zoo&view=frontpage&Itemid=60.
Moore, Brigit. 2011. The Kimberley Process: An Evaluation of its Effectiveness and an
Assessment of its Replicability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. American
University. http://www.american.edu/sis/ipcr/upload/THE-KIMBERLEY-PROCESS-An-
Evaluation-of-its-Effectiveness-and-an-Assessment-of-its-Replicability-in-the-DRC.pdf.
OECD, 2010. “ICGLR-OECD Consultation on responsible supply chain management of
conflict minerals.” 29-30 September 2010 – Nairobi, Kenya. [webpage.]
www.oecd.org/document/41/0,3746,en_2649_34889_45793897_1_1_1_1,00.html.
OECD, 2011a. OECD OECD Due Diligence Guidance For Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict- Affected and High-Risk Areas, OECD Publishing.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264111110-en.
OECD 2011b. OECD guidelines for multinational enterprises. Paris: OECD.
OECD, 2011c. Upstream pilot implementation of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance For
Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas:
Baseline Report on the Supplement on Tin, Tantalum, and Tungsten.
www.oecd.org/dataoecd/34/48/49079882.pdf
OECD, 2011d. Downstream pilot implementation of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for
Responsible Supply chains of minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas. Baseline
43

Report on the Supplement on Tin, Tantalum, and Tungsten. Retrieved on 17 December 2011
from www.oecd.org/dataoecd/34/48/49079882.pdf.
OECD, 2011e. OECD Work on Conflict-Free Mineral Supply Chain & the U.S. Dodd Frank
Act. www.oecd.org/dataoecd/56/59/48889405.pdf.
OECD, 2012. OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas: Supplement on Gold.”
http://www.oecd.org/document/60/0,3746,en_2649_34893_49137660_1_1_1_1,00.h
tml.
Report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of Congo, S/2003/1027., October 23, 2003.
Resolve, 2010a. Tracing a path forward - A study of the challenges of the supply chain for
target metals used in electronics.
http://eiccgesi.resolv.wikispaces.net/Tracing+a+Path+Forward+-
+A+Study+of+the+Challenges+of+the+Supply+Chain+for+Target+Metals+Used+in+Electro
nics
Resolve, 2010b. Tracing conflict-free minerals” [webpage]. Dated 6 April 2010. Retrieved
www.resolv.org/blog/tracing-conflict-free-minerals/
The OECD Due Diligence Guidelines for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Afflicted and High Risk Areas,
http://www.oecd.org/document/36/0,3746,en_2649_34889_44307940_1_1_1_1,00.html.
U.N. General Assembly, 64th Session. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly. 64/109
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of
rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts
(A/RES/64/109) http://www.un.org/depts/dhl/resguide/r64.shtml.
United Nations Security Council, 2003-2005. Repertoire of the practice of the Security
Council Supplement 2000-2003. Chapter V: Subsidiary organs of the Security Council.
Retrieved on 18 December 2011 from
www.un.org/en/sc/repertoire/00-03/00-03_05.pdf#page=26.
US Congress, 2010. Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
www.sec.gov/about/laws/wallstreetreform-cpa.pdf.
Vircoulon, Thierry, 2011b. Behind the problem of conflict minerals in DR Congo:
Governance. For International Crisis Group. www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/africa/central-
africa/dr-congo/behind-the-problem-of-conflictminerals- in-dr-congo-governance.aspx.
Vodafone, 2012. Conflict Minerals.
www.vodafone.com/content/index/about/sustainability/being_responsibleethicalandhonest/re
sponsible_supplychain/conflict_minerals.html .
Weiss, Paul, “the Dodd-Frank Act Requirements Relating to Conflict Minerals and Mining
and Resource Extraction Companies”, September 2010,
44

http://www.paulweiss.com/files/upload/27Sep10CM.pdf.
World Gold Council, 2012 “Conflict-free standards.” [Webpage].
www.gold.org/about_gold/sustainability/conflict_free_standards/.
45

7 ANNEX 1- IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 6 TOOLS- COUNTRY BY COUNTRY ANALYSIS
Mineral Harmonization of Creation of an Whistle EITI Formalisation of
Certification and national information blowing ASM
traceability scheme policies/domesticati exchange system mechani
on of the Protocol (Regional database) sm
Burundi A new Mining Code is Burundi has transmitted The EITI process has Conduct of
being finalized and takes data to the ICGLR been initiated Sensitization and
into consideration the Secretariat to feed into the through the 2nd information missions
ICGLR Protocol and the database. (Apr 2011) vice-presidency for artisanal miners
project of model law (April office (Apr 2011) (April 2011)
2011) -A map of the
A ministerial ordinance on artisanal sites in the
certification is in effect country is
since March 2011 available.(April
-The ICGLR National 2011)
Coordination Mechanism Sensitizations
has committed an workshops were also
independent study to organised with
ensure that the Protocol s artisanal miners in
has sufficiently been taken Ngozi, Cibitoke and
into account in the Mabayi (Nov 2011)
elaboration of the Mining 35 cooperatives
Code. have been created
and recognized.
Central The CAR has passed a The CAR handed in to In line the compliance of Artisanal miners are
African revision of its Mining Code ICGLR the statistics with the the CAR with the EITI being organized in
Republic gathered on gold and set-up of a standards has been cooperatives.
diamond. The statistics of whistle- confirmed. The CAR has
(CAR)
2009 have also been made blowing (Apr2011) established a
available. mechanis management
46

m, the unit tasked with the
mineral mapping of artisanal
brigades mines and map
have been digitalisation
strengthen
ed in order
to better
deal with
illegal
exploitatio
n of
natural
resources.
Rep of has developed a The drafting of an In regards to the database, In the EITI process, the counting of
Congo certification template ordinance for the the Republic of Congo the Republic of artisanal miners and
and conducted a study, in implementation of the plans to cooperate with Congo has made a the subsequent
partnership ICGLR Protocol on the BGR to develop a country lot of progress: it has establishment of
with UNDP, to identify Fight against mine sites map. produced its cooperatives are
the capacity Illegal Exploitation of third EITI report for planned.
requirements for Natural Resources is in 2010 and will soon There will also be a
certification. progress. (Nov 2011) publish the fourth capacity building
The introduction of the one by August 2011. programme for ASM
RCM on the other side with World Bank and
has been delayed UNDP.
DRC The DRC has developed a For the legal The DRC has shared The DRC is also the creation of
strategy in 4 steps: harmonisation, contact statistical data with the working on artisanal
1. Assessment of mine has been taken with ICGLR Secretariat compliance with EITI exploitation zones is
sites in security terms Forum of standards. The ongoing as the
and mapping on the basis Parliamentarians. DRC has stated it has second EITI report creation of ASM
of this information; already transmitted data will include cooperatives. At this
2. Traceability; As for the harmonisation, many times to ICGLR the comptoirs and end, Promines
3. Stakeholder it will depend on the draft Secretariat. In order to the cassiterite project will give
engagement and drawn by ICGLR, as the avoid lack of data issue, production. support to
monitoring & evaluation; government is currently data on mine sites such as The DRC reported Saesscam.
4. Coordination. revising large parts of the those under Ministry and that the overall Maniema is the next
The system of mineral mining legislation. those of Katanga have minerals’ production targeted province
47

traceability is being been given. Additionally, is expected to under the
implemented in several data on production, decrease due to the traceability scheme
mineral territories of the producers with license and international and Nyabibwe site at
country in collaboration GPS pressure. South Kivu whose
with coordinates of sites have labelling operation
ITRI. (Nov 2011) also been given to the the second EITI will be financed by
No untagged mineral ICGLR Secretariat. report for 2008 and the New Kingdom of
shall leave the country 2009 period has the
and already over 90% of been validated. Netherlands.
mineral exports are
tagged in the province of
Katanga. Additionally, in
order to deal with
smuggling and issues on
traceability, pilot
committees are being set
up to control if mining
operators comply with
the ICGLR
certification manual and
OECD due diligence
scheme. The first regional
certificate is supposed to
be
issued soon. (May 2012)
Kenya Kenya is currently formalisation was
implementing its new addressed by
constitution and the holding a
revision exercise of the stakeholder’s
Mineral and Mining bill is meeting to sensitize
at cabinet level. and
The situation complicates encourage the
the implementation of the artisanal miners to
six tools in their case. The work in
timings are cooperatives.
not in resonance.
48

Zambia Zambia is in the process Zambia has adhered
of collecting mineral to the EITI process.
samples in order to The first report was
establish the published in January
fingerprinting system. 2011.
This process is however After the review of
hindered by a lack of its next
trained personnel which report, it is expected
requires the CS’ that Zambia
assistance in capacity becomes fully
building. compliant.
To bring forward the
RCM, the South African
company MET TRACK has
been contracted. In
June, a trial run shall start
in a cassiterite mine.
Uganda The Uganda mining act is A database system on Uganda The promotion of
being reviewed and will be artisanal mines was put in passed a the formalisation of
enacted soon (Nov 2011) place and is operational. whistle- small-scale mining
Uganda has submitted blowing resulted in the
data to the regional protection creation of 18
database. law that cooperatives.
For the regional database, will Artisanal small-scale
the new system ICGLR support miners were trained
template is being used, the and cooperatives
but understaffing prevents implement were given grants
faster progress ation of The formalisation
the process is going on
whistle- and some artisanal
blowing miners have
mechanis acquired their
m. license as a first
result.
Rwanda Since December 2010, In regards to the
49

Rwanda is implementing EITI, Rwanda
the iTSCi traceability reported that a
scheme with 8 consultant has been
companies and exporters recruited to prepare
operating in the country. recommendations in
78 people were hired to view of Rwanda´s
specifically deal with the participation in this
mineral tagging system initiative.
and ensure that
governmental
representatives are
present at every
producing entity.
Currently, 80 to 90% of
the production is tagged.
Rwanda is also
implementing the
Certified Trading Chains
(CTC) project. In this
framework, 4 companies
were subjected to
external auditing, which
led to the certification of
2 companies. Following
the ministerial decree
passed in March 2011 ,
all minerals imported to
Rwanda have to be
traceable.
In order to comply with
the ITRI scheme, more
than one hundred people
were recruited.
In terms of cooperation
with other countries,
Rwanda has recently
50

(Nov 2011) handed back
81.34 tonnes of
cassiterite and coltan to
the DRC, where it was
originating from.
Tanzania Tanzania has adopted a A team dedicated to For the database, two Tanzania is in the 69 cooperatives
new Mining Act, Tanzania review regulations was statisticians have been process of have been formed.
is going to introduce a formed in April 2012. recruited by the Ministry completing the
certificate of origin for Tanzania recently to deal with compilation of remaining five For the ASM sector,
tanzanite. This avenue reviewed its mining Act, minerals data and one of criteria before it is the legal framework
will be used to introduce so harmonization cannot them has been designated admitted as which recognises
certification of the 4 be done immediately to link with ICGLR Compliant Member ASM as legitimate
selected minerals in the and shall await the next Secretariat and is of EITI. They are activities is already
framework of the ICGLR review. expecting directions from currently compiling in place. The
RCM the ICGLR Secretariat. the second EITI remaining challenge
Tanzania will issue its Report which will in formalization is
first certificate by the address the the demarcation of
end of 2013 remaining five mining sites, as the
criteria. latter are spread all
over the country,
and working in other
peoples areas.
------------------------------------------
51