ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour
Results and methodology

ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour
Results and methodology

ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour
Results and methodology
International Labour Office (ILO)
Special Action Programme to Combat Forced Labour (SAP-FL)
2012

Copyright © International Labour Organization 2012
First published 2012
Publications of the International Labour Office enjoy copyright under Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright Convention.
Nevertheless, short excerpts from them may be reproduced without authorization, on condition that the source
is indicated. For rights of reproduction or translation, application should be made to ILO Publications (Rights and
Permissions), International Labour Office, CH-1211 Geneva 22, Switzerland, or by email: pubdroit@ilo.org. The
International Labour Office welcomes such applications.
Libraries, institutions and other users registered with reproduction rights organizations may make copies in accordance
with the licences issued to them for this purpose. Visit www.ifrro.org to find the reproduction rights organization in
your country.
ILO Cataloguing in Publication Data
ILO global estimate of forced labour: results and methodology / International Labour Office, Special Action Programme
to Combat Forced Labour (SAP-FL). - Geneva: ILO, 2012
1 v.
ISBN: 9789221264125; 9789221264132 (web pdf)
International Labour Office
forced labour / role of ILO / data collecting / methodology / evaluation
13.01.2
The designations employed in ILO publications, which are in conformity with United Nations practice, and the
presentation of material therein do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the International
Labour Office concerning the legal status of any country, area or territory or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of its frontiers.
The responsibility for opinions expressed in signed articles, studies and other contributions rests solely with their
authors, and publication does not constitute an endorsement by the International Labour Office of the opinions
expressed in them.
Reference to names of firms and commercial products and processes does not imply their endorsement by the
International Labour Office, and any failure to mention a particular firm, commercial product or process is not a sign
of disapproval.
ILO publications and electronic products can be obtained through major booksellers or ILO local offices in many
countries, or direct from ILO Publications, International Labour Office, CH-1211 Geneva 22, Switzerland. Catalogues or
lists of new publications are available free of charge from the above address, or by email: pubvente@ilo.org
Visit our web site: www.ilo.org/publns
Printed in Switzerland
Design and cover : Caroline Chaigne-Hope, Aurélie Hauchère Vuong

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The production of this global estimate involved a great many people, in a genuinely collaborative
process. ILO wishes gratefully to acknowledge the indispensable contributions made by everyone
who was involved in this team effort.
The project was conducted by the Special Action Programme to combat Forced Labour (SAP-FL)
of the ILO Programme to Promote the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work.
The contributions of the following people are specifically and gratefully acknowledged:
Consultant statisticians to the ILO
• Mr. Farhad Mehran
• Ms. Michaëlle de Cock
They were technical advisors to ILO for the 2012 global estimate, and principal authors of the
revised methodology and of this report. It is thanks to their dedication and hard work that the
production of the new estimate was possible.
Members of the independent peer review group
• Ms. Fiona David, Executive Director, Global Research and Policy, Walk Free, Sydney, Australia
• Mr. Siddharth Kara, Carr Center for Human Rights Policy, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
• Mr. Ravi Srivastava, Centre for the Study of Regional Development, School of Social Sciences,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India
• Mr. J.J.M. Van Dijk, Tilburg Law School, The Netherlands.
Sincere thanks are extended for their expert guidance for refinement of the estimation methodology,
including their willingness to travel to Geneva for consultations to finalize the methodology.
ILO research assistants
• Natalia Alexandrova
• Anetha Awuku
• Sarah Gamha
• Barbara Granatelli
• Hélène Michalak
• Zhibo Qiu
• Sai Rong
• Kassiyet Tulegenova
These eight graduate researchers were recruited specifically for data collection. Appreciation is
extended to them all, for the enthusiasm, diligence and commitment with which they approached
this task. Ms. Anetha Awuku deserves special mention for her additional inputs during the data
validation, cleaning, estimation and report-writing stages.
ILO technical contributors
• Mr. Patrick Belser (Conditions of Work and Employment Branch, ILO)
• Mr. Frank Hagemann (International Programme for the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC))
• Ms. Rosinda Silva (International Labour Standards Department)
• Ms. Valentina Stoevska (Department of Statistics)
They provided technical support throughout the estimation process.
Members of the ILO internal advisory group on the global estimate, and all participants, from both
the ILO and external organizations, in the expert round-table discussion held at ILO, Geneva on 7
May 2012, during which the draft estimation methodology was presented and discussed.
ILO production team
• Ms. Beate Andrees, Head, SAP-FL. Project manager
• Ms. Delphine Bois, SAP-FL. Administrative assistant
• Ms. Caroline Chaigne-Hope, DECLARATION. Design and lay-out of the final report
• Ms. Aurélie Hauchère, SAP-FL. Training and supervision of data collection
• Ms. Caroline O’Reilly, DECLARATION. Technical advisor and report editor

Table of contents
1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 11
2. Main results .......................................................................................................................................... 13
2.1 Results by form of forced labour ............................................................................................. 13
2.2 Results by sex and age group of victims of forced labour ....................................................... 14
2.3 Results by region ..................................................................................................................... 15
2.4 Results by migration of the victims ......................................................................................... 16
2.5 Can the 2012 and 2005 global estimates of forced labour be compared?.............................. 17
3. What is forced labour? ......................................................................................................................... 19
4. Estimation of reported forced labour .................................................................................................. 21
4.1 Choice of methodology .......................................................................................................... 21
4.2 The basic statistical unit: a reported case of forced labour .................................................... 21
4.3 Capture-recapture sampling ................................................................................................... 22
4.4 Capture-recapture probabilities ............................................................................................ 24
4.5 Stratification .......................................................................................................................... 26
5. Data collection, entry and validation ................................................................................................... 29
5.1 The data collection phase ....................................................................................................... 29
5.2 The data entry and cleaning phase ......................................................................................... 30
5.3 Data validation and matching ................................................................................................. 31
5.4 Respect of the capture-recapture assumptions ..................................................................... 32
6. Estimation of total stock of reported and unreported forced labour ................................................. 35
6.1 Stock versus flow estimates of forced labour .......................................................................... 35
6.2 Duration in forced labour ........................................................................................................ 36
6.3 Proportion of reported forced labour ..................................................................................... 38
6.4 Breakdown by sex, age group and migration .......................................................................... 39
7. Evaluation of the results ....................................................................................................................... 41
7.1 Margins of error ....................................................................................................................... 41
7.2 Concluding remarks ................................................................................................................. 42
Annex 1 Regional classification
Annex 2 Data entry templates

1
Introduction
11
In 2005, the International Labour Office (ILO) published its first global estimate of forced labour.1 The estimate (a
minimum of 12.3 million persons in forced labour at any point in time in the period 1995-2004) received considerable
attention by governmental and non-governmental organizations and in the media. It has since been widely cited as
the most authoritative estimate of the largely hidden, and therefore difficult to measure, phenomenon of forced
labour. The estimate served its main purpose – to raise global awareness of the magnitude of the crime of modern
day forced labour, and to stimulate action at all levels against it.
The capture-recapture methodology applied was also subject to scrutiny, particularly by the academic community
and certain government agencies. A number of issues were raised concerning the underlying assumptions of the
methodology and the procedure by which the extrapolation was made.
The purpose of the present document is to describe in detail the revised methodology used to generate the 2012
ILO global estimate of forced labour, covering the period from 2002 to 2011, and the main results obtained.
The revised methodology has been developed by the ILO in close collaboration with a Peer Review Group composed
of four members of the academic community who are experts in the subject of forced labour and human trafficking.
It follows the same basic two-stage approach used for the 2005 estimate, but incorporates certain improvements
derived from ILO’s own experience in the period since 2005, the availability of new primary data sources, feedback
received from external experts on the 2005 methodology, and suggestions made by the ILO’s statistical consultants
and the peer reviewers.
Given the changes made in the methodology and the greater quantity and quality of data available for the present
round of estimation, the numerical results of the 2012 estimation are not comparable to those derived in 2005. The
2012 estimate is no longer labeled as a minimum estimate, although it is still regarded as somewhat conservative
due the nature of the capture-recapture methodology and the still limited national survey data available for
extrapolation purposes.
1ILO : A Global Alliance against Forced Labour, Global Report under the follow-up to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Princinples and
Rights at Work, Geneva, 2005; Belser, de Cock, Mehran: ILO Minimum Estimate of Forced Labour in the World, ILO, Geneva, 2005.

2
Main results
13
The ILO estimates that 20.9 million people are victims of forced labour globally, trapped in jobs into which they
were coerced or deceived and which they cannot leave. Human trafficking can also be regarded as forced labour,
and so this estimate captures the full realm of human trafficking for labour and sexual exploitation, or what some
call “modern-day slavery”.2 The data from which the estimate derives cover the study reference period of 2002-
2011. The estimate therefore means that some 20.9 million people, or around three out of every 1,000 persons
worldwide, were in forced labour at any given point in time over this ten-year period.
This figure represents a conservative estimate, given the strict methodology employed to measure this largely
hidden crime. It is not, however, labeled as a minimum estimate. With a standard error of 1,400,000 (7%), the
range of the estimated global total is between 19,500,000 and 22,300,000, with a 68% level of confidence.
2.1 Results by form of forced labour
Forced labour is classified into three main categories or forms: forced labour imposed by the State, and forced
labour imposed in the private economy either for sexual or for labour exploitation.
The distribution of the global total number of victims by form of forced labour is shown in Figure 1.
Of the total number of 20.9 million forced labourers, 18.7 million (90%) are exploited in the private economy, by
individuals or enterprises. Out of these, 4.5 million (22% total) are victims of forced sexual exploitation, and 14.2
million (68%) are victims of forced labour exploitation, in economic activities such as agriculture, construction,
domestic work and manufacturing. The remaining 2.2 million (10%) are in state-imposed forms of forced labour,
for example in prison under conditions which contravene ILO standards on the subject, or in work imposed by the
state military or by rebel armed forces.3
2 The figures do not include trafficking for the removal of organs or for forced marriage/adoption unless the latter practices lead to a
situation of forced labour or service.
3 All percentages and numbers are rounded.

Figure 1. Global estimate by form of forced labour
State-imposed
forced labour
2 200 000 (10%)
Forced sexual
exploitation
14
4 500 000 (22%)
Forced labour
exploitation
14 200 000 (68%)
2.2 Results by sex and age group of victims of forced labour
The results are presented in Figures 2 and 3. Women and girls represent the greater share of total forced labour –
11.4 million victims (55%), as compared to 9.5 million (45%) men and boys. Adults are more affected than children;
74% (15.4 million) of victims fall in the age group of 18 years and above, whereas children aged 17 years and below
represent 26% of all forced labour victims (or 5.5 million children).
Figure 2. Global estimate by sex of victims of forced labour
40%
58% 55%
Female
98%
Male
60%
42% 45%
2%
Sexual exploitation in Labour exploitation in State-imposed forced Total
private economy private economy labour

Figure 3. Global estimate by age group of victims of forced labour
67%
73% 74%
79%
Adults 15
Children
33%
27% 26%
21%
Sexual exploitation in Labour exploitation in State imposed Total
private economy private economy
2.3 Results by region4
When the prevalence of forced labour (number of victims per thousand inhabitants) is examined, the rate is highest
in the Central and South-Eastern Europe and Commonweatlth of Independent States (CSEE & CIS) and Africa (AFR)
regions at 4.2 and 4.0 per 1,000 inhabitants respectively, and lowest in the Developed Economies & European
Union (DE & EU) at 1.5 per 1,000 inhabitants (Figure 4). The Middle East (ME), Asia-Pacific (AP) and Latin America
and the Caribbean (LA) regions lie in the middle of the range, at 3.4, 3.3 and 3.1 per 1,000 respectively. The
relatively high prevalence in Central and South Eastern Europe and CIS reflects the fact that the population is much
lower than for example in Asia, while reports of trafficking for labour and sexual exploitation and of state-imposed
forced labour in the region are numerous. The low rate in the Developed Economies and European Union may be
attributed to the more effective regulatory mechanisms in place in these countries.
Figure 4. Prevalence of forced labour by region (per 1,000 inhabitants)
4.2
4.0
3.4
3.3
3.1
1.5
Central & Africa Middle East Asia & the Latin America & Developed
South-Eastern Pacific the Caribbean Economies &
Europe (non- European Union
EU) & CIS
4 Regional classification is based on that used in ILO Key Indicators of the Labour Market (2011). The listing of countries by region is
presented in Annex 1. It should be noted that the regional classification, and country composition of regions, differ from those used in the
2005 global estimate.

By contrast, when the distribution of forced labour (in absolute numbers) is examined, the pattern looks very
different (Figure 5). The Asia-Pacific region accounts for by far the highest absolute number of forced labourers –
11.7 million or 56% of the global total. The second highest number is found in Africa at 3.7 million (18%), followed
by Latin America and the Caribbean with 1.8 million victims (9%). The Developed Economies and European Union
account for 1.5 million (7%) forced labourers, whilst countries of Central, Southeast and Eastern Europe (non-EU)
and the Commonwealth of Independent States have 1.6 million (7%). There are an estimated 600,000 (3%) victims
in the Middle East.
16
Figure 5. Estimate of forced labour by region
11,700,000
3,700,000
1,800,000 1,600,000 1,500,000
600,000
Asia & the Pacific Africa Latin America & Central & South- Developed Middle East
the Caribbean Eastern Europe Economies &
(non-EU) & CIS European Union
2.4 Results by migration of the victims
The estimates were broken down according to three categories of migration by the forced labour victims: cross-
border migration, where the victims have left their country of origin to work in another country where the forced
labour took place; internal migration where the persons have left their place of origin or residence and become
victims of forced labour in another location within the same country; and no movement, where the forced labour
occurs in the location where the victims usually reside. The main results are presented in Figure 6 below.
Figure 6. Global estimate by migration of the victims of forced labour
6%
18.5%
29%
15.2%
74% 15%
Cross borders
Internal
94%
None
66.3%
56%
19%
7%
Sexual exploitation in Labour exploitation in State-imposed forced Total
private economy private economy labour

There are 9.1 million victims (44% of the total) who have moved either internally or internationally, while the
majority, 11.8 million (56%), are subjected to forced labour in their place of origin or residence. Cross-border
movement is strongly associated with forced sexual exploitation. By contrast, a majority of forced labourers in
economic activities, and almost all those in state-imposed forced labour, have not moved away from their home
areas. These figures indicate that movement can be an important vulnerability factor for certain groups of workers,
but not for others.
2.5 Can the 2012 and 2005 global estimates of forced labour be compared?
17
The 2012 estimates cannot be compared to those from 2005 for the purpose of discerning trends over time, i.e.
whether forced labour has increased or decreased over the period concerned. What can be said is that ILO has
produced a more robust estimate in 2012, based on a more sophisticated methodology and more and better data
sources.
Nonetheless, it will be noted that this estimate, at 20.9 million victims globally, is considerably higher than ILO’s
first estimate of a minimum of 12.3 million forced labourers. Another major difference from the 2005 estimate
is that state-imposed forced labour represents a lower proportion of the total, at around 10%. This could be due
in part to the fact that far fewer data are available on state-imposed forced labour relative to the other forms,
pointing to a need for further research in this area.
There is also a divergence in the age distribution of forced labourers between the respective estimates. Children
now account for an estimated 26% of all victims, a smaller proportion of the total than was the case in 2005.5 The
new data, however, confirm the ILO’s previous conclusion that women and girls are more affected by forced labour,
and particularly by forced sexual exploitation. Nonetheless, men and boys account for an overall 45% of all forced
labour victims. Finally, while regional comparisons are complicated by the changes made in the country composition
of regions between the two estimates, the Asia-Pacific region retains its place as the region harbouring the greatest
absolute number of forced labourers in the world, although its proportion of the total has decreased somewhat (to
just over one-half of all victims). The share and number of victims in Africa has, by contrast, increased in the current
estimate (18% or nearly one-fifth of the total), which it is believed represents a more accurate reflection of reality,
thanks to better reporting in the region.
The new estimates on movement, which were not calculated in 2005, demonstrate the fact that cross-border
movement is closely allied with forced sexual exploitation, whereas a greater proportion of victims of non-sexual
forced labour were exploited in their home area. An interesting new piece of information to emerge from the
estimation process is that the average period of time that victims spend in forced labour is approximately 18
months, with significant variation across forms of forced labour and regions.
5 While the estimated proportion of forced child labourers now is less than in the 2005, their absolute number remains more or less
unchanged. This may be explained in part by the fact that, in 2005, forced labour of children was better reported on than that of adults.
Also, as reported by the ILO in both 2006 and 2010, the number and proportion of children in hazardous work (often used as a proxy for the
worst forms of child labour) has progressively declined. See ILO: The end of child labour: Within reach, Report to the International Labour
Conference, 95th Session, Geneva, 2006; and ILO: Accelerating action against child labour, Report to the International Labour Conference,
99th Session, Geneva, 2010.

18

3
What is forced labour?
19
The term “forced or compulsory labour” is defined by the ILO Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), Article
2.1, as “all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the
said person has not offered himself voluntarily”. The definition thus contains three main elements: first, some form
of work or service must be provided by the individual concerned to a third party; second, the work is performed
under the threat of a penalty, which can take various forms, whether physical, psychological, financial or other;
and third, the work is undertaken involuntarily, meaning that the person either became engaged in the activity
against their free will or, once engaged, finds that he or she6 cannot leave the job with a reasonable period of
notice, and without forgoing payment or other entitlements. Forced labour is thus not defined by the nature of
the work being performed (which can be either legal or illegal under national law) but rather by the nature of the
relationship between the person performing the work and the person exacting the work. While sometimes the
means of coercion used by the exploiter(s) can be overt and observable (e.g. armed guards who prevent workers
from leaving, or workers who are confined to locked premises), more often the coercion applied is more subtle
and not immediately observable (e.g. confiscation of identity papers, or threats of denunciation to the authorities).
Forced labour therefore presents major challenges in terms of detection, for the purposes of both data collection
and law enforcement.
Convention No. 29 provides for certain exceptions, with respect to military service for work of a purely military
character, normal civic obligations, work as a consequence of a conviction in a court of law and carried out under
the control of a public authority, work in emergency situations such as wars or natural calamities, and minor
communal services in the direct interest of the community involved (Article 2.2).
A later ILO Convention, the Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105) further specifies that forced
labour can never be used as a means of political coercion or education or as punishment for expressing political
views or for participating in strike action, of labour discipline, of racial, social, national or religious discrimination,
or for mobilising labour for economic development purposes.
Forced labour includes practices such as slavery, practices similar to slavery, debt bondage and serfdom –
themselves defined in other international instruments, namely, the League of Nations Slavery Convention (1926)7
and the United Nations Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions
and Practices Similar to Slavery (1956). Further, the definition of forced labour has been interpreted by the ILO
Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (CEACR) to encompass trafficking
6While the Convention uses the term “himself”, it applies equally to women and men, girls and boys.
7The Slavery Convention (1926) defines slavery as “the status or condition of a person over whom any or all of the powers attaching to the
ri ght of ownership are exercised” (Article 1(1)).

in persons for the purpose of exploitation,8 as defined by the Palermo Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children.9
The Palermo Protocol defines trafficking in persons as the recruitment, transportation, harbouring or receipt of
persons, by means of coercion, abduction, deception or abuse of power or of vulnerability, for the purpose of
exploitation. It goes on to specify that exploitation shall, at a minimum, include sexual exploitation, forced labour,
slavery and slavery-like practices.10 There is therefore a clear link between the Protocol and ILO Convention No.
29. The only type of exploitation specified in the Protocol’s definitional article that is not also covered by ILO
Convention No. 29 is trafficking for the removal of organs. It should be noted that, as the scope of the estimate
20
is limited to forced labour, no attempt was made to estimate trafficking of adults or children for forced marriage,
adoption or organ transplant. Nonetheless, cases in which victims were deceived with false promises of marriage
or adoption but were instead put into situations of forced labour were taken into account.
Forced labour affects both adults and children, and both age groups are covered by Convention No. 29. With the
adoption of the ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182)11, forced labour, slavery, debt bondage
and trafficking of children (aged less than 18 years) became, additionally, “worst forms” of child labour, for which
immediate action should be taken for their abolition as a matter of urgency. Apart from the explicit inclusion of
“forced or compulsory recruitment of children for use in armed conflict”, there is no specific definition of what
constitutes forced labour of children, and therefore the definition specified in Convention No. 29 applies. Any work
or service undertaken by a child is considered as forced child labour where some form of coercion or deception
is applied by a third party, either directly to the child or to his or her parents, in order to oblige the child to take
a job or perform a task, or to prevent him or her from leaving the work. It is clear, therefore, that not all child
labour amounts to forced labour, as in many instances children work, frequently under hazardous conditions, in
the absence of any third party coercion. Such child labour should of course be eliminated, but does not constitute
forced labour of children.12
8 ILO (2007) Eradication of forced labour. General Survey concerning the Forced Labour Convention , 1930 (No.29), and the Abolition of
Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105), Report of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations,
R e port III (Part 1B), ILC, 96th Session, Geneva, 2007, para. 77.
9 The Protocol supplements the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (2000). The Protocol criminalizes
trafficking in persons, whether this occurs within countries or across borders, and whether or not conducted by organized criminal networks.
1 0 The full definition of trafficking in persons in Article 3 of the Protocol is: “the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt
of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of
a p osition of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another
person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms
of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs.” (Art. 3 (a)). It also
specifies that “The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a child for the purpose of exploitation shall be considered
“trafficking in persons” even if this does not involve any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article” (Art. 3 (c)).
11According to Convention No. 182, “worst forms of child labour” shall include “all forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery, such as
the sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage and serfdom and forced or compulsory labour, including forced or compulsory recruitment
of children for use in armed conflict”.
12For further guidance on this issue, refer to ILO: Hard to see, harder to count. Survey guidelines to estimate forced labour of adults and
children, ILO, Geneva, 2012.

4
Estimation of reported forced labour
21
4.1 Choice of methodology
The methodology used to generate the 2012 estimate of forced labour is a refinement of that applied by the ILO in
2005, when it made its first global estimate of forced labour.
The reasons invoked by the ILO to justify the selection of its methodology in 2005 unfortunately remain partly true
today. The continued lack of reliable national estimates based on specialized data collection instruments, prevents
the use of the most usual means to derive global estimates which is to aggregate national estimates into regional
and then global figures. The ILO has now developed and published guidelines for the design and implementation
of such national surveys.13 Pilot surveys on forced labour have been successfully implemented in more than ten
countries, of which four were national in scope, but this is still an insufficient basis on which to derive a global
estimate. More such surveys will have to be implemented in all regions of the world before such an extrapolation
method can be applied.
Moreover, a systematic review of all papers published by academic or independent researchers regarding the 2005
estimate, shows that it has been generally well received by experts, who nonetheless identified some weaknesses
in the methodology. The ILO therefore resolved to work to rectify these weaknesses to the extent possible, and the
results of these efforts are presented in this paper. As was the case in 2005, the revised method relies on a double
sampling of “reported cases” of forced labour, from which a global estimate of reported and non-reported cases
can then be extrapolated.
4.2 The basic statistical unit: a reported case of forced labour
The unit of information that was sampled was a “reported case” of forced labour. A case is defined as a recorded
piece of information about one or more persons who are currently, or have been, victims of forced labour during
the reference period (2002-2011). These cases were found in a wide variety of secondary sources, as described in
Section 5.
In order to qualify for inclusion in the sample, a “reported case” had to contain details, at a minimum, on the
following four elements:
• an activity (work or service) which amounted to forced labour, and which could be classified according to
the typology presented in Figure 8;
• a numerical figure indicating the number of victims;
• a geographical location where the activity took place; and
• a date or time period during which the persons were in forced labour, which falls within the reference
period of 2002-2011.
13 ILO (2012). Op.cit.

4.3 Capture-recapture sampling
The capture-recapture method of sampling was originally developed for estimating the size of elusive populations
such as the number of fish in a lake or the abundance of animal populations in a forest, where there are no
sampling frames available. It has since been used in a variety of other applications in social science research such
as estimating the number of homeless people in a city.
In the present context, the basic idea of the method is to sample cases of forced labour from the universe of all
reported cases of forced labour and then to resample the same universe, so as to find the fraction of cases in the
22
second sample that was also identified in the first sample. The elements of the method are schematically shown
in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Schematic representation of capture-recapture sampling
where the rectangle represents the universe of reported cases of forced labour of unknown size, say, N, and the
two ellipses (Sample 1 and Sample 2) represent respectively the capture and recapture samples of reported cases
of forced labour drawn from the universe. Let
n = Number of cases of forced labour found in sample 1
1
n = Number of cases of forced labour found in sample 2
2
n = Number of cases of forced labour found in both samples (overlap)
12
Denoting by n the total number of distinct cases found in the two samples and by x the unknown number of cases
not found in any of the two samples, the following relationships may be expressed among the various values:
N = n + x
1 2 12
n = n + n – n
The unknown values x and N may be estimated under four assumptions, as follows:
• Closed population, i.e. there is no change in the universe of reported cases of forced labour during the
course of the study;
• Cases sampled on both occasions are correctly identified as forced labour and matched with each other
without error;
• Each case has an equal chance of being selected in either sample, i.e. there is equal probability of selection
in the two samples;
• The selection of a case in the second sample is not influenced by its selection in the first sample, i.e. the
two samples are drawn independently of each other.

From these assumptions, particularly the independence assumption, it can be deduced that the probability
of selecting a particular case in sample 2 is unchanged whether or not the case was selected in sample 1. In
mathematical terms, this means the conditional probabilities of selection in sample 2 should be equal, whether the
case was selected in sample 1 or not.
Prob (in sample 2| in sample 1) = Prob (in sample 2|not in sample)
Replacing the conditional probabilities by their values
n n −n
12 = 2 12 23
n N −n
1 1
and solving the equation for the unknown value N, one finds
 
n N −n n =nn −nn
12 12 1 1 2 1 12
n N =n n
12 1 2
 
nn
  N = 1 2
n
12
Thus, the unknown total number of reported cases of forced labour (N) is estimated by multiplying the number of
cases found in sample 1 (size of capture n ) with the number of cases found in sample 2 (size of recapture n ), and
 1 2
dividing the result by the number of cases found in both samples (size of overlap n ). The corresponding estimate
12
of the number of cases not found in either sample can be calculated by x = N-n = (n -n )(n -n )/n.
1 12 2 12
The formula for calculating N and x can lead to overestimates when used with relatively small sam ple sizes. Thus,
generally, the following slightly modified versions are used in practice:14
(n +1)(n +1)
N = 1 2 −1
(n +1)
12
(n −n )(n −n )
x = 1 12 2 12
  (n +1)
12
After deriving the estimate of the total number of reported cases of forced labour (N) based on capture-recapture
sampling, the corresponding estimate of the total number of victims of forced labour (M) is obtained by multiplying
 
the total number of reported cases by the average number of victims per case
(1) M =N ×m
where m is the average number of victims per reported case of forced labour.
 
Because these estimates are based on random sampling, they are subject to sampling errors. The sampling error
or sampling variability of N and m, and therefore that of M, can be calculated from the sample data themselves in
terms of their standard deviations expressed as the square root of variances:
(n +1)(n +1)(n −n )(n −n )
Var(N)= 1 2 1 12 2 12
(n +1)2(n +2)
12 12
14Thompson, Steven, K., Sampling, Ch. 18 Capture-Recapture Sampling, A Wiley-Interscience Publication, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1992, pp. 212-224.
 

n σ2
Var(m)=(1− ) m
N n
where n is the number of distinct cases of forced labour in the two samples as defined earlier and
  ∑ (m −m)2
σ2 = i i
m (n−1)
m being the number of reported victims in case i. Finally, the variance of the total number of reported victims is
24 i
obtained by applying the rule for variance calculation for the product to two independent variables15
 
Var(M)=m2Var(N)+N2Var(m)+Var(N)Var(m)
.
 
4.4 Capture-recapture probabilities
The basic capture-recapture model assumes a binomial probability distribution of the sample cases. According
to this model, a forced labour report is either “captured” or “not captured” by a given team with respective
probabilities p and 1-p. The values of p are the same for all reports but may differ between the teams, say p=p for
1
team 1 and p=p for team 2.
2
With an expanding universe of reported cases of forced labour and heterogeneity of sample selection, this simple
binomial model may no longer be appropriate. It may be more suitable to consider more general models for
describing the probabilities of occurrences of forced labour cases in the sample, such as the Poisson distribution.
Consider an extension of the capture-recapture model where there is more than one recapture. 16 Let
f ,f ,f ,...,f
o 1 2 k
represent the frequencies of cases of forced labour identified by the ILO teams 0, 1, 2, …, k times, respectively (f is
o
unobserved). The unknown total numb er of reported cases may be expressed as
N = f + f + f +...+ f
o 1 2 k
and the combined sample size of distinct cases found by the teams is
 
n = f + f +...+ f
1 2 k
Assuming that the frequencies f, i=0,1, … ,k are generated by a Poisson distribution with parameter l, the unknown
i
total number of reported cases of fo rc ed labour may be estimated by
n
N =
1− p
o
15 Goodman, Leo A.: “On the Exact Variance of Products,” in Journal of the American Statistical Association, December 1960, pp. 708-713.
16 Chao, A.: “Estimating the population size for capture-recapture data with unequal catchability,” in Biometrics, Vol. 43, 1987, pp. 783-
 
79 1 , and Chao, A.: “Estimating population size for sparse data in capture-recapture experiments”, in Biometrics, Vol. 45, 1989, pp. 427-438.
Other proposed methods to deal with heterogeneous capture-recapture probabilities include: Huggins, R. M. and P. S. F. Yip: “A note on
nonparametric inference for capture-recapture experiments with heterogeneous capture probabilities”, in Statistica Sinica, 2001, Vol. 11,
pp. 843-853; Cormack, R.M.: “Log-linear models for capture-recapture,” in Biometrics, Vol. 45, 1989, pp. 395-413, and Lavallée, P. and L.-P.
Rivest: “Capture-Recapture Sampling and Indirect Sampling,” in Journal of Official Statistics, Vol. 28, No. 1, 2012, pp. 1-27.

where p is the probability of zero occurrence of a reported case in the combined sample, p =exp(-l), with l
o o
estimated by 2f /f . Another estimate of N is given by
2 1
f 2
N =n+ 1
2f
2
which in terms of the capture-recapture notations introduced earlier may be expressed as f =(n -n )+(n -n ) and
1 1 12 2 12
f =n where the elements n , n and n are calculated based on the frequency of the reported cases without
2 12 1 2  1 2
elimination of duplicates within teams.
25
The corresponding estimate of the global number of reported victims of forced labour is derived by multiplying the
estimate of the total number cases N by the average number of victims per case m as described in the previous
section. The sampling variance of the final estimate is calculated by the formula for the variance of products of
random variables mentioned earlier, except that the variance of N is now obtained from
f 2  f 1  f  2
var(N)= 1 1 +2 1 +  1 
2f  f 2 f  
2 2 2
In the implementation of this methodology for the 2012 global estimate, out of the total of 5,491 reported cases of
forced labour found in the ca p ture-recapture exercise, 4,069 were found only once and 1,422 were found multiple
times. Cases found more than once tended to contain higher numbers of victims than those found only once. For
example, the average number of victims in cases found just once was 223. In cases found twice, it was 253 and in
cases found more than twice, it was 812.
The frequency distribution of the reported cases by the number of times they were found is shown in Table 1.
Sometimes, the same report was found by different members of the same team, and in some cases, even by the
same person at different times, for example, in different languages.
Table 1. Frequency distribution of reported cases of forced labour by number of occurrences in the
capture-recapture sample
Number occurrences Reported cases %
Total 5491 100
1 4069 74.1
2 1186 21.6
3 167 3.0
4 46 0.8
5 10 0.2
6 7 0.1
7 3 0.1
8 1 0.0
9 0 0.0
10 1 0.0
11 1 0.0
No formal goodness-of-fit test was carried out due to the missing number of reported cases with no occurrence
in the capture-recapture sample. But the Poisson distribution seems to fit the data reasonably well, at least for

the first three frequencies. The ratio of the first to the second frequencies (4069/1186= 3.43) is almost correctly
proportional to the ratio of the second to the third frequency (1187/167=7.11). Under the Poisson distribution,
the ratio of these ratios (3.43/7.11=0.48) should be equal to the ratio of the respective number of occurrences
(2/3=0.67).
4.5 Stratification
In order to improve the accuracy of the results and to provide estimates broken down by region and by
26
form of forced labour, the data were stratified in terms of three categories:
i. Geographical region
The geographical stratification is based on the regional classification used in the 2011 edition of ILO Key Indicators
of the Labour Market, as follows:
• Developed Economies and European Union
• Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and the Commonwealth of Independent States
• Asia-Pacific
• Latin America and the Caribbean
• Middle East
• Africa
The list of countries under each region is reproduced in Annex 1. It differs from that used in the 2005 global
estimate, as certain new regions have since been designated, and some countries have been shifted from one
region to another.
ii. Form of forced labour
The stratification by form of forced labour follows the basic typology used in 2005, with one main modification - no
breakdown is given for trafficking. The revised typology is presented in Figure 8. The “mixed” category that was
included in 2005, covering victims of both sexual and labour exploitation, has also been eliminated.
Figure 8. Typology of forced labour by form

iii. Type of data
The data were also stratified by type, distinguishing between two categories: first, data describing actual cases
in which one or more persons are, or were, in forced labour at the same time, place etc (called “incidents”) and
second, data providing information on forced labour cases compiled over a period of time (called “aggregates”).
Typically, aggregate data refer to a larger number of victims and their probability of selection in the capture-
recapture samples is higher than that of data on incidents. No estimated data of any kind were included in the
database.
The statistical treatment of aggregate data differed from that of incidents. The data on incidents were subject to
27
capture-recapture sampling by geographical region and by form of forced labour, while the data from aggregate
data were subject to capture-recapture without stratification. The resulting estimate obtained from the aggregate
data was then distributed by geographical region and form of forced labour according to the distribution of the
incident data. This differential treatment was adopted to improve the robustness of the results. It was noted that
the incident data demonstrated a much higher degree of detail and precision than the data from the aggregate
data.

5
Data collection, entry and validation
29
5.1 The data collection phase
The double sampling, capture and recapture, was conducted simultaneously during thirteen consecutive weeks by
two teams, based in the ILO headquarters in Geneva: Team 1 (which could be associated with Capture) and Team 2
(associated with Recapture). Each team was composed of four graduate research assistants of different nationalities.
The researchers all had the same level of education, having recently completed or being about to complete a
Master’s Degree in Political Sciences, International Relations or Economics. The researchers were selected on the
basis of their knowledge of human rights, labour issues and international migration, and also on their languages
skills. The requirement was for members of each team, collectively, to be able to read and communicate in the
same eight languages: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Italian, Portuguese, Russian and Spanish.
All researchers followed an intensive two-day training course on forced labour and human trafficking at the start
of their assignment, during which the relevant concepts and definitions were explained in detail. This was followed
by practical training in data collection, during which the various research tools were presented, including the
database into which the researchers would code the cases they found. They read some “dummy” reports prepared
by the ILO, analyzed them and decided whether or not they constituted cases of forced labour, through group
and individual exercises, with feedback provided by the trainers. The proposed estimation methodology and the
statistical treatment of the data were presented, including the four assumptions underlying capture-recapture.
The necessity for the teams not to exchange any data or source of information was emphasized. The teams were
located in different parts of the ILO building.
During the first two weeks of data collection, all researchers kept aside the documents containing cases they had
rejected, so that the ILO expert could validate their decision, explaining in cases of incorrect assessment, why the
case should in fact have been retained. Approximately 2,500 different sources were located containing reported
cases of forced labour. Reports were mainly identified through internet searches but also, to a lesser extent, by
telephone, email, visits to libraries and face-to-face interviews.
The sources of information used, in decreasing order of frequency, were:
• media reports (including newspapers, radio, TV, internet media)
• local, national, regional, international or thematic NGO
• government documents, from Ministries of Justice, Labour, Social Affairs, Migration, Foreign Affairs and
Interior or from special police or other units dedicated to combating trafficking and forced labour
• other international organizations, through their national offices or headquarters
• academic reports
• ILO reports, including those of the Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and
Recommendations (CEARC)
• trade union reports and employers’ organization reports.

As briefly explained above, the researchers looked for two main types of data:
• “Incidents” of forced labour, which are cases in which one or more persons are described as being or having
been in forced labour together, whether at the same location, trafficked by the same person, working for the
same employer, or freed during the same operation (police or NGO raid, for example). Incidents are usually
reported in considerable detail, describing aspects such as the recruitment process, working conditions,
means of coercion, etc.
• “Aggregate” data, which are statistics published on a periodic basis, usually by organizations working on some
aspect of forced labour. Typical examples are police reports of the number of victims identified over a given
period of time, and NGO reports of the number of trafficking victims sheltered. While some reports give
30
information on the nationality of the victims, or the industry in which they were working, it is quite rare to
find other details such as the length of time that victims spent in forced labour.
A third type of data was reference data, which provided contextual or other information relevant to the forced
labour situation. Researchers entered such sources in the database if they encountered ones of interest, but did not
deliberately look for them.
5.2 The data entry and cleaning phase
Once classified by the researcher as being a case of forced labour, a description of the case and its source was entered
in an Access database designed for this exercise. Two databases were compiled, one by each team, with an identical
structure. The two databases were located on different computers, and there was no link between them.
The structure of the database allowed for entering data other than the variables necessary for the computation of
the global estimate. This additional information will be exploited by ILO in the future to produce thematic reports, for
example, on legal responses to forced labour (court cases, sentences, fines) and on the economics of forced labour.
Two data entry forms were used: a first to describe the source of information, and a second to describe details of the
cases reported in the source. The data entry forms are presented in Annex 2.
Each report was first coded with ten variables: unique identifier for report, title, organization, source, authors, type of
source (International Organization, NGO, government, etc.), website, ISBN, date of publication and language.
Each forced labour case was described by 72 variables:
• a unique identifier, generated by the system (1 variable)
• source of information (4 variables)
• coding of the type of data: incident, aggregate or reference (2 variables)
• description of the victims (number, age, sex, ethnic or religious group) (11 variables )
• geographical details of the case, including of migration if relevant (6 variables)
• indicators of threats and penalty, forced or deceptive recruitment, working and living conditions imposed by
the employer and impossibility to change employer (29 variables)
• dates and duration in forced labour (6 variables)
• economic data (6 variables)
• exit process (1 variables )
• judicial data (2 variables)
• form of forced labour (State/non-State; sexual/labour exploitation) and migration (2 variables)
• summary and comment (2 variables).
A hidden control was created to record the day the case was entered, to allow for subsequent verification.
A printed copy of the source was filed for the archives and, in the case of a non-written source (such as video footage or
a phone call), a short summary was written and printed. In addition, the (internet) translations into English of reports
written in Arabic, Chinese and Russian were filed, which were needed for validation of the data by the ILO expert.

The data cleaning phase aimed to detect and correct typographical and other errors or missing values. The
consistency between the case summary (50 to 100 words) and the main variables was checked, with particular
emphasis on those concerning the indicators of forced labour. The original source of information was often
consulted to rectify the error or to enter missing variables. The most common missing values were on the dates
and duration of exploitation.
5.3 Data validation and matching
31
The aim of the data validation phase was to identify and mark all data (both incident and aggregate) which fulfilled
four conditions for their retention in the database for the purpose of calculation of the estimate:
• the working situation could be qualified as one of forced labour;
• the number of victims is specified;
• the exploitation took place between 2002 and 2011; and
• the place where the exploitation took place is indicated.
For the validation of incidents, the first and most important assessment was the determination of the presence
or absence of the main forced labour indicators, involuntariness and penalty (or menace of a penalty), using the
28 variables in the database relating to these indicators. In order to be validated, the incident had to show one or
more indicators of involuntariness and penalty. The only exception to this was in cases reported by the judiciary.
If the judicial report was of a person condemned in court for a forced labour offence, the case was assumed to be
genuine even if no details were given, and the stated number of victims was included in the database.
The second element was to know in which type of activity the victim was working; for this, the minimum requirement
was to have sufficient information to classify the incident as one of either state-imposed forced labour or of forced
labour or sexual exploitation in the private economy. The third element for validation was the number of victims,
ideally by their age and sex, or at least by the total number. A case described as involving “many” or “dozens of”
women, for example, was not validated. Many cases, especially in the media, were somewhat surprisingly reported
without any indication of when and where they actually took place. “Victim testimonies” included in reports, such
as “I was ten years old when I was sold to a master and became his slave”, often fell into this category. Such cases
were discarded as there was no evidence to show that they were not invented simply for communication purposes.
Regarding aggregate data, many are published with very little detail included. When the information needed
to validate the data was missing, the source of the information was evaluated instead. Thus, reports coming
from sources considered as reliable, such as national police reports or other governmental sources, international
organizations and established international NGOs, the data were assumed to be valid and were retained. Other
sources were only validated if the data were presented in sufficient detail to indicate their authenticity. When no
information was given on the type of activity performed by the victims, as was often the case with aggregate data
on trafficking, the cases were coded as “sexual and labour exploitation”.
The results of the data collection and validation process are presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Number of reported cases of forced labour collected and validated
No. of cases collected No. of cases validated
Team 1 3,959 3,644
Team 2 4,171 3,875
Total 8,132 7,519
The next stage was to match the cases common to both teams, i.e. cases which have been both captured and
recaptured. It also involved identifying duplicates within a single team. Even though the teams developed their own
procedures for minimizing duplicates, such as by allocating different countries to each team member according to

their language skills, duplication still occurred. For example, a case of international trafficking might be reported in
both the country of origin and of destination of the victim and therefore be captured by two researchers working
in the same team.
“Matching” of incidents (whether within one team or common cases between the two teams) was done by
comparing the following elements in each case:
• the number of persons involved
• the location
• the date of exploitation or release
32
• the description of the form of exploitation
• and, on occasion, the names of the exploiters.
When incidents were described in detail, matching could be quite straightforward. But in other cases, especially
where the incident was reported in different languages or the data were not entirely consistent between different
sources, the matching process was longer and more difficult.
Matching was also often challenging for “aggregate” data. Official statistics were generally the easiest to match
in this category. For example, aggregate data on the number of victims identified by the police in a given country
in a given year could be quite easily matched, even when the same data were published in a report by another
organization or even in a different language, as the original data source was most often cited.
However, when different sources reported information possibly regarding the same persons, matching became
much more problematic. For example, were trafficking victims sheltered by the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) in a given country the same persons as those identified and reported by that country’s government
in the same year? The following rule was applied in such cases: If the number of victims, place, type of exploitation
and date (or period) were the same in both cases, they were treated as duplicates. If one of these elements was
different, and there was no means to prove that both cases related to the same victims, the cases were assumed
to be different.
At the end of this process, a new table was created of validated cases, indicating whether each case was found by
only one team or by both. A unique identifier was then assigned to identify each separate case for the purpose of
calculation.
5.4 Respect of the capture-recapture assumptions
In order to be valid, the capture-recapture procedure must respect certain assumptions as detailed below.
Capture-recapture must take place in a closed population
The universe for capture-recapture is the set of all reports on forced labour available worldwide during the three
months of data collection. Because capture and recapture took place simultaneously, it can be assumed that no
report entered or left the universe between the two sampling exercises. In reality, it is likely that some reports
disappeared and others appeared during this period (e.g. all new reports published and some websites or reports
which closed or disappeared from the internet during the three months of data collection). But, as the three-
month period of the study may be considered to be sufficiently short, it is not believed that any departure from
this assumption had a significant impact on the results.
Cases sampled must be correctly identified as forced labour and matched with each other
without error
The identification of cases of forced labour was done using the lists of indicators for incident data and verifying the
reliability of the source of information for aggregate data. In case of doubt, a conservative judgement was made. For
example, a newspaper report about exploitative working conditions, even if judged by the journalist to be forced

labour or slavery, would not be validated as such if there was no evidence of deception or coercion. Matching of
cases was the most time-consuming phase of the procedure. It was done by a meticulous sequence of checks,
successively refining the criteria whenever there was a suspicion of duplicates. Quite often, the original sources
were retrieved, or even new sources located which contained all the elements needed to make the assessment.
In the basic capture-recapture model, all cases must have an equal probability of being
sampled
The underlying assumption of equal probability in the capture-recapture methodology is reflected in the binomial
33
distribution, which may not be appropriate given the heterogeneity of the data sources. It is clear that a case
reported in the US Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons report had a higher probability of being
sampled than a case reported by a local NGO working in an African community. One way to allow for unequal
probability of selection in the capture-recapture methodology is the use of the Poisson distribution. Selecting a
report of forced labour is a “rare event” and the frequency of its selection follows the probability distribution of
“rare events”, which is generally formulated by a Poisson distribution. For the calculation of the 2012 estimate, the
Poisson distribution was used to describe the probabilities of occurrences of forced labour cases in the sample.
The two phases (capture and recapture) must be independent of each other
What would foster interaction between the data collection teams and thus decrease their level of independence?
The main reason would be direct leaks of information, either because of friendship between researchers and their
willingness to help each other, or by having access to cases by “stealing” from the other team without first looking
for them. It cannot be proved that this did not happen, but it is believed to be highly unlikely. The researchers had
fully understood the importance of this rule, which was explained to them in detail during the training. During
the data collection period, several opportunities were taken to re-emphasize to the researchers that they were
personally responsible for the quality of the data and respect of the rules. Some random checks were also made
on the dates on which common reports were found by the two teams, and there was no evidence that “sharing”
had occurred.

6
Estimation of total stock of reported and
unreported forced labour
35
The result of the capture-recapture sampling is an estimate of the total number of persons reported to have been
victim of forced labour at some time during the ten-year reference period, called here “flow estimate of reported
forced labour.” There are two important aspects to this estimate. First, it counts equally all persons, irrespective of
the length of time they spent (duration) in forced labour; thus victims of forced labour for a few days are counted in
exactly the same way as others who were victims during the entire ten-year period. Second, it includes only those
cases and victims of forced labour that were reported, and does not account for those that went unreported.
The next step in the estimation process is therefore to extrapolate the capture-recapture estimate to cover both
reported and unreported cases of forced labour, and also to make an adjustment for the differences in duration in
forced labour among the victims. The result of this step provides a stock estimate of total forced labour, which may
be interpreted as being the “full-time equivalent” number of victims of forced labour during the entire ten-year
period, or alternatively as the average stock of persons in forced labour at any given point of time.17
6.1 Stock versus flow estimates of forced labour
The first element of the estimation method is to convert the capture-recapture estimate of reported forced labour
over time into a stock estimate at a given point of time. This involves multiplying the capture-recapture estimate
(called here the reported flow estimate) by the average duration in forced labour measured as a fraction of the
length of the reference period. Thus, denoting by m the average duration in forced labour in stratum h, the total
h
reported stock of forced labour at a point of time during the reference period is expressed by
∑
T = T m
reportedstock h reportedflowh h
(2)
where
 
M being the capture-recapture estimate of forced labour measured in stratum h as described in section 4.
h
The second element of the estimation method involves the decomposition of the total stock of forced labour into
the reported stock and the unreported stock as follows
T =T +T
stockforcedlabour reportedstock unreportedstock
(3)
17 Kutnick, Belser, and Danailova-Trainor: Methodologies for global and national estimation of human trafficking victims: current and future
approaches, Wor ki ng Paper No. 29, Programme on Promoting the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, Special Action
Pro gramme to combat Forced Labour, ILO, Geneva, 2007.

Denoting by r the ratio of reported to unreported forced labour in stratum h, the combination of (2) and (3) leads
h
to
m
T = ∑ T m + ∑ T h
stockforcedlabour h reportedflowh h h reportedflowh r
h
m
= ∑ T (1+ h)
  h reportedflowh r
h
36
m
= ∑ T h
  h reportedflowh p
h
(4)
where p is the proportion of reported forced labour in total forced labour.
h  
The result (4) indicates that the total stock of forced labour at a point of time is a weighted sum of the capture-
recapture estimates in the different strata, where the weight in each stratum is the ratio of the average duration in
forced labour to the proportion of reported forced labour in that stratum.
In the 2005 estimate, the weights were assumed all equal to 1, resulting in the simplified equation
total stock of reported and unreported forced labour at a point of time
= total flow of reported forced labour over time
The justification for this simplified equation was the assumption of a positive relationship between the probability
of reported cases of forced labour and the duration in forced labour, i.e. forced labour of short duration is less likely
to be reported than forced labour of long duration. Assuming that the relationship is continuous and monotone
(not necessarily linear), it was argued that the curve describing the relationship intersects the line of equality
somewhere in the mid-range of the duration in forced labour. At the point of intersection, the duration in forced
labour is equal to the reporting probability. It further assumed that the amount of forced labour to the left side of
the point of intersection is essentially the same as the amount to the right in each stratum, then the assumption
that (μ /p =1) should lead to a reasonable approximation of the total stock of forced labour in that stratum.18
h h
6.2 Duration in forced labour
A refinement introduced in the 2012 methodology was the use of data on duration in forced labour, as recorded
in the database. Fields were established in the database to record the dates on which forced labour started and
ended. In practice, however, the duration data were found in a variety of formats, such as “one week”, “1 or 2
years”, “over two months”, “during the harvest season”, “in 2008”, “a couple of months”, etc.
For analysis, it was decided to use the month as the unit of measurement, and the year for reporting purposes.
Rules were established to convert the reported information on duration into a number of months or fraction of
a month. Thus, for example, “one week” was converted to “0.25 months”, “over two months” or “a couple of
months” to “2 months”, “during the harvest season” to “3 months”, “in 2008” to “12 months” and “1 or 2 years”
to “18 months”.
18 The argument would also be valid if the relationship between duration in forced labour and the probability of reporting is in fact
monotonously decreasing, as long as the duration-reporting curve crosses at some point the line of equality and the mass of forced labour
on t he two sides of the point of intersection is equal.

Overall, 797 reported cases contained data on the duration in forced labour. The size distribution of duration of
forced labour is presented graphically below. Reported durations of longer than 120 months were truncated to 120
months, corresponding to the ten-year reference period.
Figure 9: Duration in Forced Labour
37
49.0%
18.2% 18.3%
5.4% 5.0%
3.3%
0.7%
1/2 1 2 3 4 5 6-10
Years
According to these results, nearly half of all reported spells of forced labour were six months or less. More than
one third were between one and two years. Some 8 % of cases were, however, of forced labour episodes lasting 5
years or more. Overall, the average duration in forced labour, across all forms, was 17.7 months, or about 1.5 years.
The range of duration in forced labour varied among geographic regions and forms of forced labour. Duration
in state-imposed forced labour was found to be somewhat lower (at about 7 months) than forced labour either
for commercial sexual exploitation (about 17 months) or for other exploitation (about 19 months) in the private
economy.
However, the duration data obtained from the reported cases are unlikely to be representative of the duration
in forced labour of unreported cases. Almost all reported cases of forced labour follow some sort of intervention
resulting in the termination of the forced labour episode. Hence, the reported duration of forced labour can be
expected to be shorter than would be the case in the absence of such an intervention, as in an unreported case.
This issue is similar to the difference between interrupted and completed spells of unemployment. The measured
duration of unemployment in household surveys is the duration of unemployment up to the time of the survey,
generally referred to as the interrupted spell of unemployment. The completed spell of unemployment is the total
span of unemployment experienced by the individual before obtaining employment or leaving the labour force,
irrespective of the timing of the survey.
Drawing from this parallel, a distinction was made in the 2012 methodology between interrupted and completed
spells of forced labour. The data obtained from the reported cases were considered to be estimates of the duration
of interrupted spells of forced labour.
By comparison, the victims of forced labour in unreported cases would experience a longer duration in forced
labour, called here the completed spell. The duration of completed spells of forced labour is taken to be twice as
long as the duration of interrupted spells. This is because the timing of the intervention may be assumed to be
independent of the duration of forced labour and therefore to fall, on average, just in the middle of the forced
labour episode.

Given the truncation of 120 months covering the maximum span of the ten-year reference period, the average
duration of completed spells of forced labour measured in months is derived by the following relationship:
Completed spell of forced labour = min (120, 2*Interrupted spell)
The estimated average duration of completed spells of forced labour was found to be 29.4 months, or less than
twice the estimated average duration of interrupted (reported) forced labour of 17.7 months.
38
A related issue concerns repeated spells of forced labour. In practice, many victims of forced labour experience
discontinuous, though often linked, episodes of forced labour. For example, some seasonal migrants in brick kilns
or in quarries may be treated as being in forced labour for the duration of a single season, but the episodes may
recur every season, linked to each other through continued indebtedness to the same employer. Such repeated
spells of forced labour are accounted for through the duration estimates. As the unit of measurement is a reported
case of forced labour, and each forced labour spell has a chance of being reported, repeated spells are in principle
represented in the capture-recapture sample.
6.3 Proportion of reported forced labour
The estimation of the global stock of reported and unreported forced labour requires, in addition to data on duration
in forced labour, information on the share of reported to total forced labour. This corresponds to the values of p
in the expression (4) of the total stock of forced labour. In 2005, the need for this information was addressed by
assuming that the ratio of the average duration in forced labour to the probability of reporting is equal to one.
With the availability of new data from four national surveys on forced labour conducted recently by the ILO, the
2012 methodology attempted to directly estimate the proportion of reported cases.
Because three of these surveys addressed returned migrants residing in their home areas, the respondents
were no longer in a situation of forced labour. Given this, it can reasonably be assumed that they answered the
survey questions accurately, and the survey results can thus be considered to cover all cases, both reported and
unreported, of forced labour in these countries.
In general, let T be the estimate of forced labour in country i based on a national survey with reference period
i
t. The estimate refers to the total number of persons who experienced forced labour at some time during the t-
i i
year reference period of the survey. The corresponding number for a ten-year reference period can be obtained
proportionally as (120/µ)T, where µ is the average duration in forced labour, measured in months, for country i.
i i i
The comparison of the adjusted survey result with the capture-recapture estimate for the corresponding country
provides an estimate of the share of reported number of victims in total forced labour in that country,
M
p = i
i 120
( )T
m i
i
where M is the capture-recapture estimate of reported forced labour in the same country.
i
 

A pooled estimate of p is obtained by smoothing the four individual country estimates using the duration data as
auxiliary variable. Thus the pooled estimate is given by the expression
ea+bm
p=
1+ea+bm
where a=-4.774 and b=6.107 are the estimated parameters of the logistic regression of the survey data on p
and µ (measured as fraction of the 120 month reference period), andm= pm+(1− p)m is the overall average
  1 2 39
duration in forced labour calculated as a weighted average of duration of interrupted spells of reported cases
(m=17.7/120=0.146) and completed spells of unreported cases (m =29.4/120=0.245). The resulting
1 2
estimate of p obtained by iteration is
 
   
p = 3.6%
According to this result, on average, for every reported case of forced labour, about 27 cases go unreported. This
estimate of p is based on the four national surveys on forced labour currently available to ILO, and can be improved
upon in the future when more national survey data become available.
Because of the fragility of the estimate of p, no attempt has been made to use separate estimates of p for the
different strata as expression (4) of the global estimate would require. The same value of p=3.6% is therefore used
for all regions and all forms of forced labour.
6.4 Breakdown by sex, age group and migration
In the final step of the estimation process, the global estimate was disaggregated by sex of the victim and by age
group (adult and child) for each form of forced labour. In addition, a breakdown by “migration” was computed, for
the categories of internal migration, cross-border migration and no migration.
The breakdown was based on information obtained from the reported cases. Data on sex of the victim were
available in 1,860 cases, on age group in 2,184 cases and on movement in 2,208 cases. The unknown values
were distributed in proportion to the known values within each form of forced labour. For age group, additional
information from the aggregate data was also used.
The observed proportions obtained from the reported cases were first applied to the global estimate for all forms
of forced labour combined. The estimates by form of forced labour were then derived by iterative proportional
fitting. This procedure ensured consistency between the breakdown estimates and the global estimates obtained
by capture-recapture sampling.

7
Evaluation of the results
41
7.1 Margins of error
Given the elusive nature of the target population and the limited direct measurement of the phenomenon, it would
be unrealistic to expect global estimation of forced labour with a high degree of accuracy. Like all estimates based
on sampling, the global estimates obtained here are subject to both sampling and non-sampling errors.
Sampling errors
Sampling errors arise from the fact that the estimate is based on observations from a sample of cases and
generalization to the population at large. Had different samples been obtained on different occasions by the
research teams, the resulting global estimate would also have been somewhat different. Because capture-recapture
sampling produces a probability sample, the information obtained from the sample gives not only a global estimate
of forced labour, but also an estimate of the sampling error. This sampling error, called standard error, is calculated
based on variance of the estimate and also taking into account the additional variability due to the estimation of
number of victims per case and of average duration in forced labour.
The resulting estimate of the standard error is found to be about 1,400,000. The standard errors of the different
regional and component estimates of forced labour are presented in Table 3.
Table 3. Standard errors of global estimate of forced labour
Estimate Standard
error
World 20,900,000 1,400,000
Asia-Pacific 11,700,000 800,000
Latin America and the Caribbean 1,800,000 600,000
Africa 3,700,000 300,000
Middle East 600,000 70,000
Central and South-Eastern Europe and CIS 1,600,000 200,000
Developed Economies and European Union 1,500,000 200,000
State-imposed forced labour 2,200,000 200,000
Forced sexual exploitation in the private economy 4,500,000 1,000,000
Forced labour exploitation in the private economy 14,200,000 500,000

The sampling errors may be interpreted in terms of confidence intervals. Thus, the unknown global number of
victims of forced labour, estimated from this sample, is likely to be within an estimated range of roughly one
standard error, which in the present context is
or in the range
20,900,000 +/- 1,400,000
42
19,500,000 - 22,300,000.
The level of confidence associated with this confidence interval is about 68%. Broader confidence intervals with
higher confidence levels (95% or 99%) can be calculated using two or three standard errors.
Corresponding standard errors can also be calculated for the global estimates of forced labour by sex, age group
and movement. For this purpose, the generalized variance procedure may be used based on the formula
relative standard error = √(a+b/x)
where the values of a and b are obtained by fitting an appropriate linear regression.
Non-sampling errors
An assessment of non-sampling errors such as coverage errors, classification errors, editing errors and data
processing errors is extremely difficult in the present context. The detailed description of the data collection and
validation procedures provided in section 5 demonstrates the extent of the efforts made to ensure high quality of
the underlying data.
7.2 Concluding remarks
While acknowledging the limitations of the estimation methodology, ILO believes it to be the best possible given
the current status of data on forced labour, and therefore the resulting estimates to represent the most reliable
available at this time. As more and better information is produced, especially through primary surveys at national
level, it will become possible to generate progressively more accurate estimates in the future. This will further
strengthen the empirical basis for the design and implementation of more effective policy responses so as to end
the crime of modern day forced labour.
_

Annex 1
Regional classification
43
Developed Israel Asia Latin America & Middle East Tanzania, United
Economies & Japan South Asia the Caribbean Bahrain Republic of
European Union New Zealand Afghanistan Caribbean Iran, Islamic Uganda
European Union Western Europe (non- Bangladesh Bahamas Republic of Zambia
Austria EU) Bhutan Barbados Iraq Zimbabwe
Belgium Iceland India Cuba Jordan Middle Africa
Bulgaria Norway Maldives Dominican Kuwait Angola
Cyprus Switzerland Nepal Republic Lebanon Cameroon
Czech Republic Pakistan Guadeloupe Oman Central African
Denmark Central & South- Sri Lanka Guyana Qatar Republic
Estonia Eastern Europe (non- South-East Asia Haiti Saudi Arabia Chad
Finland EU) & CIS Brunei Jamaica Syrian Arab Congo
France Central & South- Darussalam Martinique Republic Congo,
Germany Eastern Europe Cambodia Netherlands United Arab Democratic
Greece Albania East Timor Antilles Emirates Republic of
Hungary Bosnia and Indonesia Puerto Rico Occupied Equatorial Guinea
Ireland Herzegovina Lao People’s Suriname Palestinian Gabon
Italy Croatia Democratic Trinidad and Territory Southern Africa
Latvia Serbia and Republic Tobago Yemen Botswana
Lithuania Montenegro Malaysia Central America Lesotho
Luxembourg The former Yugoslav Myanmar Belize Africa Namibia
Malta Republic of Philippines Costa Rica North Africa South Africa
Netherlands Macedonia Singapore El Salvador Algeria Swaziland
Poland Turkey Thailand Guatemala Egypt Western Africa
Portugal Commonwealth of Viet Nam Honduras Libyan Arab Benin
Romania Independent States Pacific Islands Mexico Jamahiriya Burkina Faso
Slovakia Armenia Fiji Nicaragua Morocco Cape Verde
Slovenia Azerbaijan Papua New Panama Sudan Côte d’Ivoire
Spain Belarus Guinea South America Tunisia Gambia
Sweden Georgia Solomon Islands Argentina Eastern Africa Ghana
United Kingdom Kazakhstan East Asia Bolivia Burundi Guinea
North America Kyrgyzstan China Brazil Comoros Guinea-Bissau
Canada Republic of Moldova Hong Kong, China Chile Eritrea Liberia
United States Russian Federation Korea, Colombia Ethiopia Mali
Other Developed Tajikistan Democratic Ecuador Kenya Mauritania
Economies Turkmenistan People’s Paraguay Madagascar Niger
Australia Ukraine Republic of Peru Malawi Nigeria
Uzbekistan Korea, Republic Uruguay Mauritius Senegal
of Venezuela, Mozambique Sierra Leone
Macau, China Bolivarian Réunion Togo
Mongolia Republic of Rwanda
Taiwan, China Somalia

Annex 2
Data entry templates
44
Form 1 - Data source
Form 2 – Reported cases

45

ILO Special Action Programme to combat Forced Labour (SAP-FL)
Programme for the Promotion of the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work
International Labour Office
4 route des Morillons
CH-1211 Geneva 22
Switzerland
Tel. + 41 22 799 63 29
Email: forcedlabour@ilo.org
www.ilo.org/forcedlabour