LME Responsible Sourcing Handbook
Version 1
Publication date: May 2023
THE LONDON METAL EXCHANGE
10 Finsbury Square, London EC2A 1AJ | Tel +44 (0)20 7113 8888
Registered in England no 2128666. Registered office as above.
LME.COM

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Table of contents
1 Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 1
2 Overview of the LME Policy on Responsible Sourcing of LME-Listed Brands ............................. 2
3 LME requirements......................................................................................................................... 4
4 Brand compliance ......................................................................................................................... 7
5 Conclusion .................................................................................................................................. 17
Appendix A: Guidance Note on Track B Audits ................................................................................ A - 1
Appendix B: Guidance Note on Supplier Red Flags ......................................................................... B - 1
Appendix C: Guidance Note on Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas (“CAHRAs”) ...................... C - 1
Appendix D: Guidance Note on ISO 14001 and ISO 45001 Compliance ......................................... D - 1
Appendix E: Assurance summary table ............................................................................................ E - 1
Table of figures
Figure 1: LME framework for responsible sourcing ................................................................................ 7
Figure 2: LME tracks to OECD Guidance implementation ..................................................................... 8
Figure 3: Track A – compliance process for the recognised alignment-assessed standard track ....... 10
Figure 4: Track B – compliance process for the audited LME RFA track ............................................. 12
Figure 5: Track C – compliance process for the published LME RFA track ......................................... 13
Figure 6: RFA phased transparency approach ..................................................................................... 14
Figure 7: Track D – compliance process for the Secondary Materials Track ....................................... 15
Figure 8: LME timeline .......................................................................................................................... 16
Figure i: Supplier red flags flow chart ................................................................................................ B - 2
Figure ii: ISO compliance flow chart ................................................................................................. D - 2

LME responsible sourcing handbook
1 Introduction
The LME occupies a privileged position in the global metals industry. Its Brands list determines which
categories of metal can be delivered against LME contracts; and more broadly, many international
physical supply contracts stipulate LME Brands for delivery. Accordingly, the LME is able to work with
the metals and mining industry to ensure that its Brand list embodies global expectations of best
practice.
For over a century, the LME stipulated only metallurgical standards for its Brands. While the LME does
not change its approach lightly, after a lengthy market engagement and a formal consultation, the
responsible sourcing requirements were introduced in October 2019. The requirements laid out in the
LME Policy on Responsible Sourcing of LME-Listed Brands (the “Policy”) apply to all Brands listed for
good delivery on the LME against physically settled contracts (aluminium, aluminium alloy, North
American Special Aluminium Alloy Contract (“NASAAC”), cobalt, copper, lead, nickel, tin and zinc).
These requirements are designed to ensure that metal eligible for delivery against LME contracts
(LME-listed Brands) appropriately embodies relevant responsible sourcing standards. The
requirements are:
1. Implement the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas (“OECD Guidance”) through track A, B or C, or confirm
secondary sourcing through Track D
2. Maintain an ISO 14001 environmental management system certification or equivalent
3. Maintain an ISO 45001 occupational health and safety management system certification or
equivalent
This handbook summarises the Policy and provides specific guidance on topics that merit additional
explanation. All the information contained within this handbook (the “Information”) is provided for
guidance and background purposes only and should therefore be used in conjunction with the Policy.
All capitalised terms not defined in this handbook have the meaning ascribed to them in the Policy.
This document may be updated from time to time to reflect changes to the Policy resulting from either
changes to OECD Guidance or otherwise. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the
Information and the Policy, the Policy shall prevail. Recipients of the Information should consult the
LME website for further information on the Policy. Neither the LME, nor any of its affiliates makes any
warranty or representation, express or implied, or accepts any responsibility or liability for, the reliability
or suitability of the Information for any particular purpose. Any market participant with questions in
respect of any aspect of the LME’s responsible sourcing requirements is encouraged to contact the
LME at responsiblesourcing@lme.com.
1

LME responsible sourcing handbook
2 Overview of the LME Policy on Responsible Sourcing of
LME-Listed Brands
2.1 LME rationale
The LME created the LME Policy on Responsible Sourcing of LME-Listed Brands for three intrinsically
linked reasons, as follows:
• Collective ethical responsibilities. The LME believes that its industry has an ethical imperative
to embrace principles of responsible sourcing – and therefore, the LME has a key role in facilitating
this. The LME is a seller’s market, which means that a buyer of metal may be delivered metal of
any LME-listed Brand. The LME cannot accept a situation where consumers are required to take
delivery of metal which is not responsibly sourced.
• Commercial imperative. The fundamental service of the LME is to price metals – and, by the
nature of its market, the LME price will generally be the price of the least valuable Brand in the
Brand lists. The LME must act to ensure that its price reflects the value of responsibly sourced
metal, and is not artificially depressed by metal which is not sourced in such a manner.
• Providing leadership for the global metals industry. LME stakeholders demand responsible
sourcing – and the metals industry must collectively live up to the responsibility. The LME has
listened to calls for it to take a leading role on responsible sourcing – calls which arise because
the LME can most efficiently promote a centralised process. And the LME can do this in a manner
which leverages the LME’s embedded knowledge of the metals market, respects the logistical
challenges, builds on existing work in the sector, and provides appropriate time and support to
Producers in meeting these requirements.
The LME sees these drivers as entirely complementary. The ultimate arbiter of ethics must be the
global consumer; increasingly, consumers are standing up for their ethical beliefs, and demanding that
the products they purchase are made from responsibly sourced metal. Those who work in the metals
industry also bring strong ethical views on the activities of their own companies. Given this
combination, then, the entire supply chain must react, and it becomes the commercial interest of all
participants to provide responsibly sourced metal.
2.2 Features underpinning the LME requirements
The following principles encapsulate the foundation of the LME’s approach to responsible sourcing:
• The twin tools of transparency and standards. Transparency sits at the heart of the LME’s
strategy; it allows consumers to understand the steps being taken by Producers in respect of
responsible sourcing, and drives consistency in the application of standards across and within
industries. Equally, the LME recognises that if it is to request such transparency from its Producers,
then those Producers must be able to trust that transparency will be used fairly. In particular,
Producers who embrace transparency should not feel that they will be disadvantaged by being
open about their supply chain risks, while peers may not; further, that the provision of such
transparency will not reveal confidential sensitive information about their company. The information
to be made transparent must be meaningful and verifiable without being commercially prejudicial;
this balance is at the heart of the LME’s requirements.
At the same time, the LME also believes that consumers of metal are entitled to a minimum
standard – even if they do not themselves choose to analyse the metals which make up the supply
chain of products that they consume. Accordingly, the LME believes that standards are a crucial
2

LME responsible sourcing handbook
element of its system. And while it understands that standards alone could lead to “greenwashing”
and a lack of incentive to go beyond minimum standards, the LME believes that the combination of
transparency and standards represents an optimised toolbox to protect consumers.
This is why the LME’s requirements build on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (“OECD”) Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas (“OECD Guidance”) in requiring both minimum standards
and transparency from all Brands, wherever they source their metal. Through OECD compliance,
the LME market will meet these dual obligations.
To facilitate this, and in recognition that many models exist for achieving this end, the LME is
provides a number of tracks through which Producers may achieve such compliance, fully inclusive
of transparency requirements. The LME will be monitoring this intersection of standards and
transparency carefully to ensure that the resulting transparency meets globally accepted
requirements in order to drive progress. In the event that the LME does not believe that reporting
meets these requirements, it reserves the right to increase its expectations in respect of such
transparency to ensure that this progress continues. The LME believes that this will motivate
Producers to go as far as possible in embracing ethical principles, as their consumer base will then
recognise the additional steps taken and react positively.
• No discrimination between large-scale and artisanal / small-scale mining. Both forms of
mining clearly carry differing, but equally important, risks and challenges. In acknowledging these,
the LME recognises that risk assessments must be tailored to the circumstances. Therefore, the
LME sets out to provide an equally meaningful set of requirements for both large-scale and artisanal
/ small-scale mining.
This is particularly relevant in two areas. Firstly in allowing sufficient time for artisanal / small- scale
mining to comply with the relevant requirements, the LME is recognising that this industry has
further to travel in order to meet globally accepted standards for responsible sourcing, and that
without the provision of adequate time to achieve this, the LME will be unfairly disadvantaging those
legitimately working in artisanal or small-scale mines.
Secondly, in prioritising Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (“EITI”) reporting, the LME
acknowledges the potential for financial crime arising from large-scale mining and the resulting
need for transparency. This is why those Producers using the LME’s Red Flag Assessment (“RFA”)
template are required to evaluate whether their suppliers facilitate the disclosure of potential
financial crime and corruption risks under EITI, thus addressing one of the key concerns in respect
of large-scale mining. Producers utilising a standard will be obliged to meet the requirements of
that standard in respect of EITI reporting (in line with the OECD Guidance), and the LME will monitor
all associated reporting to ensure this issue is meaningfully addressed. Twinned with the well-
established application of OECD requirements to artisanal / small-scale mining risks, the LME
intends to achieve an equitable balance which does not disadvantage any route of economic
empowerment.
• Well-established work in the sector. A huge amount of work has already been undertaken in the
responsible sourcing space. The LME wishes to build on this and to provide a framework through
which the industry can benefit from this investment.
In particular, the LME’s approach is grounded in the OECD Guidance, the most globally relevant
approach to responsible sourcing. This then allows Producers to make use of existing standards
3

LME responsible sourcing handbook
(defined by industry bodies, commercial entities and others), if they so wish. And because these
standards define audit approaches, the most appropriate auditors will be positioned to assess
compliance.
The first stage is the establishment of company management systems and the OECD red flag
identification process, which provides a consistent and widely accepted model to identify metal
Brands which may require higher focus due to the specific nature of their operations. By using the
red flag model – and facilitating it by providing a specific red flag assessment template (the LME
RFA template) for those Producers which choose to use it – the LME is embracing global best
practice, and indeed, advancing it.
In this respect, the LME intends to play a positive role where it is able to most add value; namely, in
facilitating the identification of red flags, and the embedding of transparency principles and
standards. The LME does not intend to define or audit those standards, since others are better
placed to undertake this role. Rather, the LME’s rules provide the framework within which standard
definition and auditing can be undertaken on a consistent and fair basis.
• A pragmatic and clear process. In order to be meaningful, the LME understands that its approach
must be feasible for global Producers of all metals. As such, it must ensure that its requirements
are clear and achievable. As outlined above, the LME has detailed a number of tracks through
which its Brands may achieve compliance, designed to leverage existing work and provide both
risk- and preference-based optionality, as well as a clear and practical structure for those who are
new to the field of responsible sourcing.
3 LME requirements
The LME’s approach is based on the OECD Guidance, and adopts the OECD five-step framework for
risk-based due diligence in the mineral supply chain (“OECD five steps”), as outlined in Annex 1 of the
OECD Guidance. The exception to this is Producers of tin Brands, for which the full OECD Supplement
on Tin, Tantalum and Tungsten (“3T supplement”) will apply, given that the supplement was specifically
designed for tin (as well as tantalum and tungsten).
For all Brands, the OECD five steps can be summarised as follows:
• Step 1: Establish strong company management systems
• Step 2a: Identify risks in the supply chain
• Step 2b: Assess risk of adverse impacts
• Step 3: Design and implement a strategy to respond to identified risks
• Step 4: Carry out independent third-party audit of supply chain due diligence
• Step 5: Report on supply chain due diligence
While the LME accepts that there is some debate about the applicability of these steps depending on
the results of the risks identification process, the LME believes Producers that identify red flags in their
supply chains are required to complete all five steps, while those which do not find red flags are required
to complete the relevant elements of Steps 1 and 2a. However, the LME agrees with broad market
consensus that it is difficult, if not impossible, to assess the accuracy of Steps 1 and 2a without some
4

LME responsible sourcing handbook
form of audit, assurance or verification1. As such, the LME is asking its Producers to provide such
evidence through a variety of possible tracks, as outlined below. Further, in line with the core features
of the LME requirements, the LME is strongly of the opinion that transparency is essential to the
progression of responsible sourcing initiatives, and as such, considers that transparency (Step 5)
remains a core requirement for all its listed Brands.
To this end, while the OECD five steps of Annex 1 remain the core of the LME requirements, the LME
believes that there exist a number of areas where it is more appropriate or useful to adopt elements
from other sections of the OECD Guidance, and so has assumed a broad interpretation of this in
several key aspects:
• Application of the 3T red flags. Although the LME is satisfied that it is appropriate for base metals
to be able to use the OECD five steps, this section does not include any description of red flags,
which are crucial to the application of the OECD Guidance. As such, the LME believes that the red
flags as defined in the 3T supplement can and should apply to all base metals (as well as tin) and
this is the approach adopted by the LME Red Flag Assessment. The LME will also accept the use
of red flags as defined in the OECD Supplement on Gold (“gold supplement”). For the avoidance
of doubt, this approach may be used even in respect of Producers whose listed Brand is not gold.
Although the LME is not requiring the use of the 3T supplement more broadly, it continues to believe
that it provides relevant guidance and some helpful interpretations of corresponding sections in the
main OECD Guidance, and would encourage Producers to review the 3T supplement for such
information. Further, if any Producer would like to voluntarily comply with the 3T supplement (or
indeed, the gold supplement), the LME would have no objection.
• Utilisation of the broadest assessment of risk indicators for CAHRAs. A key element of the
red flag assessment is the identification of conflict-affected and high-risk areas (“CAHRAs”). The
LME believes that it should take a broad definition of CAHRAs, so as to ensure that the widest
range of possible risks is captured, rather than focussing simply on countries plagued by overt
conflict. In particular, the LME utilises the definition of CAHRAs in the OECD gold supplement,
which provides the most comprehensive assessment of risk indicators for CAHRAs. However,
existing standards which have already been alignment assessed, and which prefer to maintain the
CAHRA definition from the main section of the OECD Guidance if this is already incorporated within
the standard may be allowed to do so.
In relation to the CAHRA definition under the EU Conflict Minerals Regulation (“CMR”) which came
into effect in January 2021, the LME’s expectation when the responsible sourcing requirements
were published was to accept CAHRA definitions based on this list. However, upon review of the
methodology, the non-exhaustive list has been formulated to identify CAHRAs only with relation to
the minerals that fall within the scope of the CMR (namely tin, tantalum, tungsten, and gold). Thus
for tin Brands, this list may be accepted by the LME, but all other metal Brands are encouraged to
seek additional resources to make their own determination on the CAHRA status of areas that are
relevant to their supply chain.
For additional CAHRA guidance, see Appendix C: Guidance note on methodologies for the
determination of Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas.
1 The LME understands that the use of audit vs. assurance is not uniform within the responsible sourcing world. For clarity, the
LME will accept either process of verification, as long as (i) the process is consistent with the requirements of an external
standard for those on track A, and / or (ii) conducted by a professional included on the LME’s list of recognised auditors. For
the avoidance of doubt, references to “audits” and “auditors” throughout this document can be taken to mean either auditor or
assurer for the purposes of LME compliance, as appropriate to the preferences of the relevant Brand and / or standard
5

LME responsible sourcing handbook
• Commitment to transparency for all Brands. The OECD Guidance may be interpreted to
suggest that the transparency required under Step 5 is only required when the red flags are
engaged. However, the LME believes, in line with much of its market and consistent with its
commitment to transparency, that all LME Brands should provide public disclosure over their efforts
in respect of responsible sourcing. As such, the LME will require all Producers of its listed Brands
to provide such transparency, consistent with their chosen route to compliance.
Producers complying through the use of an external or internal OECD-aligned standard (be that
voluntarily or as a result of the identification or red flags in the supply chain) will be expected to
publish Step 5 reporting in line with the OECD Guidance (although the LME notes that both the 3T
and gold supplements provide greater clarity and guidance in terms of the content of Step 5
reporting, and the LME would encourage its Producers to refer to these supplements when providing
this transparency). Further, while the LME believes that Step 5 reporting is well-established, it does
not yet believe that such reporting meets the standard expected by the LME, or indeed, the OECD
and broader market actors. The LME is working with the OECD and standard providers to ensure
that such reporting rises to meet global expectations, and will reserve the right to require greater
transparency in the future should reporting not become more comprehensive.
As an alternative route to compliance, and in line with the LME’s commitment to a pragmatic and
clear process, the LME is also providing a standard-form template – the RFA – which can be
completed at low cost to assess supply chain red flags, and either audited (with appropriate Step 5
transparency) or fully published to the broader market (on a phased timeline) to provide a subset of
common disclosure which will encourage challenge, but not compromise commercial
confidentiality. This includes Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (“EITI”) disclosure as to
potential financial crime risks.
The publication of the RFA also offers a secondary benefit, in that it allows a level of review by the
market (following the LME’s own review), whereby all market stakeholders will be able to review
published RFAs. This two-factor level of assurance will help provide clarity and ensure consistency.
• Commitment to workplace health and safety and other responsible sourcing concerns. In
the first instance, the LME expects Producers to work towards ISO 14001 and ISO 45001
standards, or equivalent.
The LME fully recognises that there exists a full spectrum of sustainability concerns, and the LME’s
requirements incorporate only a sub-section of these on the basis of (i) their relevance to the LME
market, and (ii) those which have seen the most significant demand from its core stakeholders.
That said, the LME does recognise that for many of its listed Brands, a broader, or indeed,
alternative set of concerns represent a greater risk than those outlined in the OECD Guidance;
further, that much work has been undertaken, including by the United Nations, and as incorporated
with the OECD’s Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, in order to identify these risks, and to
implement standards and associated certification programmes for the mitigation of such.
Much of this work has focused on environmental concerns, and while the LME is not proposing to
change its core scope in respect of environmental issues, it is continuing with the implementation of
ISO 14001 as an interim measure as planned, and more broadly, also incorporating the ISO 45001
in respect of workplace health and safety standards.
As a final point, for clarity, and in line with the OECD Guidance, the LME’s requirements do not
include implementation of the OECD Guidance for secondary or recycled metal. However, this is not
to say that the LME is not interested in the challenges facing secondary and recycled materials in
6

LME responsible sourcing handbook
terms of traceability, and will continue to work with the market to offer support and input where that
would be of use. Further, the LME would welcome voluntary reporting on the part of producers of
secondary or recycled metals, and the potential transparency that this engenders; however, it will
only be running its framework and assurance process for primary metal.
Through fulfilment of the above, and utilising the tracks outlined below, the LME believes that all its
Brands will be able to achieve compliance with the LME’s responsible sourcing requirements. The
LME’s responsible sourcing framework is set out in Figure 1, demonstrating the relationship between
the core features of the LME Policy and the routes to implementation.
Figure 1: LME framework for responsible sourcing
4 Brand compliance
4.1 Track overview
At the outset, the LME recognises that the risk profile of its metals varies – each of the LME’s listed
Brands will have specific features which call for varying levels of due diligence – and, as such, it is
appropriate for the LME to utilise the OECD’s five-step framework, which allows for a risk-based
approach. Further, the LME understands that a number of factors go into a Producer’s decision-
making process when choosing its route to compliance. The LME wishes to respect this by providing
optionality in terms of tracks to compliance, which should allow Producers to tailor compliance to their
existing processes, as summarised in Figure 2.
7

Classification: Internal
LME responsible sourcing handbook
Figure 2: LME tracks to OECD Guidance implementation
4.1.1 Track A: Recognised alignment-assessed standard track
The use of an internal or external OECD-aligned standard is available for (i) all Brands which have
identified red flags in their supply chain, (ii) Brands which have not identified red flags, but wish to use
a standard to demonstrate their compliance with the applicable OECD five steps, and (iii) those Brands
which voluntarily wish to complete all five steps of the OECD Guidance.
The Producer of any Brand falling into these three categories will be expected to undertake the
following steps:
• Identify a standard. Producers will need to identify the standard towards which they are working
to align their Brand. Standards may be internal or external, and the LME believes that either may
be used for the purposes of its responsible sourcing framework.
• Ensure the standard has undergone OECD alignment assessment. The Producer’s chosen
standard must be aligned with the OECD Guidance. The LME is aware that alignment assessment
is not a “binary” process and acknowledges that alignment assessment results will be qualified in
places; accordingly, that there will always be an element of discretion which must be applied by a
relevant authority. The LME accepts its responsibility to make these judgement calls (advised by
market experts if required) in determining whether to accept as “successful” the outcome of a
particular alignment assessment process.
In order to achieve alignment assessment, standards must demonstrate the two key components
of alignment assessment; namely, (i) the first component, being the extent to which the
recommendations from the OECD Guidance have been incorporated into the programme’s policies,
standards, procedures and operating requirements set out for Producers, and (ii) the second
component, being the extent to which it can be reasonably concluded that the criterion is
implemented by the programme, including by deploying the necessary measures to ensure

LME responsible sourcing handbook
compliance and securing adequate remedial action in cases where Producers participating in the
programme and / or auditors do not adhere to the programme’s policies and standards (when
applicable to them). This is laid out in the OECD Methodology for the Alignment Assessment of
Industry Programmes with the OECD Minerals Guidance, and the Alignment Assessment Tool
(“OECD alignment assessment methodology”).
Given the potential time required to complete this process – and the LME’s interest in ensuring the
development of new standards to address existing gaps – standards can achieve “conditional”
alignment assessment if they have passed the first component assessment but do not yet have
sufficient implementation data to pass the second. LME-listed Brands will then be able to select one
of these conditionally approved standards to achieve compliance via the recognised alignment-
assessed standard track (Track A), noting the extant risk that the standard does not subsequently
pass the second component of the alignment assessment (albeit the LME is confident that no
standard would initiate this process should they not be willing to do the work to ensure it achieves
full alignment). This solution will increase the optionality for Brands and reduce the pressure to
achieve full alignment assessment within potentially infeasible timelines.
The LME will also reserve the right to consult the OECD on the results of any alignment assessment
before providing final approval.
For standards which have already been alignment-assessed, the LME will not require a second
alignment assessment to be conducted; however, it will ask to review the results of the existing
alignment assessment before providing final approval. Similarly, standards which undergo
alignment assessment to comply with the requirements of another body or regulation (such as the
EU CMR, for example) would also be eligible to submit those results to the LME for consideration,
rather than commissioning a second alignment assessment.
In the case of an external standard, the body owning that standard would be expected to arrange
for the relevant alignment assessment. It is expected that a Producer would look to achieve this
assurance (either on a fully aligned basis, or conditional alignment as outlined above) before
pursuing the standard in question.
In the case of an internal standard, the Producer itself would need to make such arrangements.
The Producer may look to undertake the alignment assessment in parallel with its implementation
work in respect of the standard, acknowledging that any changes to the internal standard arising
from the alignment assessment process will also need to be reflected in the implementation
workstream.
But in either event, the Producer of the relevant Brand is responsible for ensuring that it has elected
a standard which is successfully OECD alignment-assessed and that the results of such
confirmation have been approved by the LME. The LME maintains a list of recognised OECD
alignment assessors who, in the opinion of the LME, are competent and qualified to undertake an
alignment assessment. Similarly, the LME also maintains a list of standards which have been
confirmed by the LME as alignment assessed, subject to the consent of the relevant standard
owners. The list of assessors and standards is available on the LME on its website2. Should either
the OECD Guidance, or the standard, undergo substantive change, the LME will expect that the
alignment assessment is re-performed to ensure ongoing consistency. The Brand’s next audit
would then be expected to be conducted against revised the standard.
• Demonstrate initial compliance with the standard. The Producer’s elected standard will specify
2 LME Approved Partners: https://www.lme.com/en/About/Responsibility/Responsible-sourcing/Approved-partners
9

LME responsible sourcing handbook
the requirements for audit, and the Producer will hence be expected to comply. In the case of an
external standard, the standard itself may lay out a review process through which the audit will have
to pass. In the case of an internal standard, such a review process is unlikely to form part of the
standard, and the output of the audit will hence represent the final stage in the process. But in
either event, it is expected that these internal standards (and associated audits) will follow the
OECD Guidance in addressing all risks, including those covered in Annex II of the OECD Guidance.
However, the ultimate decision will need to rest with the LME (advised, where appropriate, by
market experts).
• Demonstrate ongoing compliance with the standard. Again, the Producer’s elected standard
will specify the requirements for updating or repeating the audit process, and must be followed to
ensure ongoing compliance with the LME’s responsible sourcing requirements. For internal
standards, the LME will require the Brands to re-submit audit reporting at least every three years
and, in any event, following material change to the standard, to confirm ongoing compliance. All
related audit documents must be submitted to the LME.
This process is outlined in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Track A – compliance process for the recognised alignment-assessed standard track
As outlined above, the LME provides clarity in terms of which standards have been successfully
deemed to be aligned with the OECD Guidance (subject to the consent of the standard owner) by
publishing details of such standards on its website.
In respect of transparency of the audit results, the LME requires that public disclosure is undertaken
10

LME responsible sourcing handbook
in line with the requirements outlined in Step 5 of the OECD Guidance, and in accordance with the
requirements of the relevant standard.
All Brands on the recognised alignment-assessed standard track will also be required to comply with
the LME’s ISO requirements outlined in Section 4.2.
4.1.2 Introduction to the LME Red Flag Assessment
The LME understands that OECD-aligned red flag identification processes already exist within the world
of responsible sourcing standards. Further, the LME is aware that, while many of these have been
designed to address a particular issue, or the specificities of a particular metal, their primary aim is to
translate the OECD Guidance (or similar such guidance) into a practical form that allows Producers or
other interested parties to map the risks associated with a particular supply chain.
However, the proliferation of such standards can mean that there is some confusion as to what would
be considered core for such an assessment generally, and for the purposes of the LME’s requirements
specifically. Further, when considering its responsible sourcing requirements, and in light of the LME’s
commitment to pragmatism, the LME has endeavoured to provide tracks to compliance which do not
require the use of a standard and / or an external audit.
To this end, the LME has developed its Red Flag Assessment (“RFA”) template, which defines the
information which the LME would expect to receive as part of a red flag assessment. The completion
of this template will allow Producers of LME Brands to determine whether they raise red flags in their
supply chain. Any Producers discovering red flags automatically need to comply through the
recognised alignment-assessed standard track (Track A), but Producers which do not then have a
choice to either submit the RFA template to the LME for review and verification (Track C), or to submit
it for an external, third party audit to achieve the same end (Track B); the subsequent transparency
requirements will depend on the track chosen. Of course, as noted above, some Producers may
equally choose to comply through Track A even in the absence of red flags, either because they wish
to use a standard to demonstrate their compliance with the applicable OECD five steps, or because
they wish to voluntarily complete all five steps of the OECD Guidance.
While the LME’s expectation is that the RFA process is undertaken internally by Producers of a listed
Brand, it is equally possible that Producers will choose to have this information collated and reported
to the LME by an independent third party commissioned for that purpose. The LME believes that both
models would be compliant with its RFA requirements; however, it would note that regardless of track
chosen, the Producer itself will remain wholly accountable for both the submission, and the accuracy
of the reporting contained therein.
Finally, the LME is reserving the right to make reasonable changes to the RFA to more closely align
with current and future versions of the OECD Guidance without formal consultation.
4.1.3 Track B: Audited LME RFA track
Figure 4 outlines the compliance process for those Producers that wish to complete the RFA and
submit it for an external, third party audit (Track B).
The Producer is required to complete the RFA and appoint an independent third party auditor to assess
the validity of the information contained therein. Further guidance on this is provided in Appendix A:
Guidance Note on Track B Audits. The LME maintains a list of recognised auditors who, in the opinion
11

LME responsible sourcing handbook
of the LME, are competent to undertake such an assessment on the LME website3 (subject to the
permission of the auditors in question), which is updated regularly.
Once the audit is complete, and assuming the auditor concurs that the relevant supply chain contains
no red flags, the audit results are submitted to the LME for review. It may be necessary for the LME to
revert to the Producer or auditor with questions or explanatory requests following an initial review.
Otherwise, the LME will ratify the results and require that public disclosure is undertaken in line with
the requirements of Step 5 of the OECD Guidance.
The Producer will be required to review and update the RFA for each of its Brands annually to ensure
that their risk profile has not changed over the preceding year, or indeed, that they do not require an
alternative track to compliance. The external audit (with the results submitted to the LME) and
transparency requirements will also be repeated annually.
All Brands on the audited LME RFA track will be required to comply with the LME’s ISO requirements
outlined in Section 4.2.
Figure 4: Track B – compliance process for the audited LME RFA track
4.1.4 Track C: Published LME RFA track
As with the audited LME RFA track (Track B), the LME wanted to provide a route to compliance which
did not require the use of a standard. Track C – the published LME RFA track – goes even further by
ensuring that Brands can comply without requiring a standard, or the use of an external audit.
3 LME Approved Partners: https://www.lme.com/en/About/Responsibility/Responsible-sourcing/Approved-partners
12

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Instead, Producers of Brands achieving compliance via the published LME RFA track are required to
complete the RFA template and submit it to the LME for review. It may be necessary for the LME to
revert to the Producer with questions or explanatory requests following an initial review in line with the
process diagram outlined in Figure 5. The LME will either confirm the Producer’s assessment, or reject
it and reclassify. If the Producer does not agree with the LME’s assessment, the LME will engage with
that Producer to fully understand, and resolve, the discrepancy.
Figure 5: Track C – compliance process for the published LME RFA track
As set out above, Brands complying via Track C will not be required to undertake an audit against a
standard; however, they will be required to review and update the RFA annually to ensure that their
risk profile has not changed over the preceding year, or indeed, that they do not require an alternative
track to compliance. The LME will review all such assessments.
The final stage of Track C relates to transparency. Alongside the LME’s review of all submitted RFA
templates, the LME also believes that the publication of RFAs will act as a second level of “audit” of
the information contained therein, allowing other Producers, civil society and non- governmental
organisations (“NGOs”), industry bodies, regulators and other interested parties to diligence the
information provided and ensure its accuracy.
That said, the LME is conscious that it will be the first Exchange require the publication of responsible
sourcing risks and, as a result, there is a process of education and familiarisation for its market in
understanding and interpreting this information. To address this concern, the LME has implemented a
phased approach in respect of RFA public reporting, as outlined in Figure 6. For the first two years
post-implementation, the LME will publish only summary statistics of the RFAs. For the subsequent
two years, the LME will publish the RFAs in full, but on an anonymised basis. This will allow Producers
to refer to the work undertaken in the RFA processes of other LME-listed Brands on Track C, as well
as providing time for the market more broadly to become familiar with the type of reporting it can expect
13

LME responsible sourcing handbook
to see. In year five post-implementation, the LME will require all Producers to publish their Brand’s
RFA in full.
Finally, all Brands on the published LME RFA track will be required to comply with the LME’s ISO
requirements outlined in Section 4.2.
Publication date Year RFA public reporting
Not earlier than 31-Dec-22 Y1 Summary statistics
Not earlier than 31-Dec-23 Y2 Summary statistics
Not earlier than 31-Dec-24 Y3 Anonymous versions
Not earlier than 31-Dec-25 Y4 Anonymous versions
Y5 and
Not earlier than 31-Dec-26 Attributed versions
onwards
Figure 6: RFA phased transparency approach
4.1.5 Track D: Secondary materials track
In line with the OECD Guidance, Brands that source entirely Secondary Material are exempt from the
implementation of the OECD Guidance, and comply with the LME’s responsible sourcing requirements
by using the Secondary Material Track (Track D). A Brand is only eligible to use Track D if (i) it is able
to determine the origin of all Input Materials sourced during the Reporting Period, (ii) the Input Materials
used in production of that Brand have been solely from Secondary Material sources, and (iii) the Brand
does not wish to voluntarily use one of the other three tracks.
Brands are required to complete the Secondary Materials Sourcing Attestation Form (the “attestation
form”) on an annual basis with the first submission deadline on 30 June 2022. The LME reviews the
information provided in the attestation form, requests clarifications from the Producer as needed, then
either accepts or rejects the form based on the information provided. The LME notifies the Producer
once a final decision is reached.
Finally, in the interests of transparency, all Brands complying with the LME responsible sourcing
requirement through Track D will be identified as using 100% secondary materials on LMEpassport (or
other location as the LME may choose).
14

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Figure 7: Track D – compliance process for the Secondary Materials Track
The LME works with all its Producers to ensure that they have fully understood the four possible
tracks to compliance, and chosen one that works appropriately for them, reflecting their Brand’s
individual profile. Any Producer not engaging with the compliance process may be subject to Brand
Action as defined in Section 4.5.
4.2 ISO 14001 and ISO 45001 certifications
In parallel to Brand OECD compliance, all LME-listed Brands are expected to obtain ISO 14001 and ISO
45001 certifications, or equivalent.
This requirement will be administered in a similar manner to the LME’s existing ISO 9001 requirement,
in that Producers will be required to provide the appropriate certificates for the smelter (or equivalent,
in all cases being the final substantive step resulting in the production of LME grade metal) and keep
these updated in line with the requirements of the standards body.
Should a Producer wish to use a certification programme (internal or external) which they consider to
be equivalent to, or an improvement upon, the ISO 14001 or ISO 45001 certifications, the Producer
should submit an independent, third party audit report which assesses and confirms such equivalence.
In the case of an external certification programme, assessment need only be commissioned once; as
such, the LME anticipates that a certification programme owner (or users of that certification
programme) would commission such an assessment. Once the LME has confirmed equivalence, it
will publish a list of appropriate certification programmes on its website, subject to the consent of the
certification programme owner.
At any stage, a Producer failing to undertake required actions (at the times specified by the LME’s
implementation timeline, as further set out in Section 4.4) may be subject to Brand Action (as defined
15

LME responsible sourcing handbook
in Section 4.5).
4.3 LME decision-making and grievance procedure
A fundamental limitation on the global adoption of responsible sourcing standards is the international
nature of metal supply chains, and the consequent lack of a “central authority” with the ability to enforce
standards on a worldwide basis. For this reason, in formulating its responsible sourcing requirements,
the LME has had to take on a role of recognising alignment assessors, auditors for internal standards
under track A and RFAs in track B, reviewing RFA results in track C, assessing the sufficiency of the
alignment assessment of standards, the final check of audit reports in tracks A and B, and the
equivalence of certification programmes. While the LME is comfortable playing such a role (which it
already does in respect of the final assessment of the metallurgical quality of its brands, informed in
that case by assaying and other assurance processes), the Exchange also recognises that there will
be differing market views on these topics, and it will not always be possible to reach decisions which
are accepted by all market actors. However, in the absence of another body willing to undertake such
a role (and enjoying the confidence of the market so to do), the LME believes that it will need to act as
the ultimate arbiter of these issues.
Should it prove necessary and appropriate, the LME will ensure that it has access to appropriate
industry experts to support and advise on such decision making.
Furthermore, and in order to facilitate engagement from as broad a set of stakeholders as possible,
the LME does maintain a “grievance procedure”, under which any market participant having concerns
as to the responsible sourcing credentials of a particular brand may report these concerns to the LME,
on a confidential basis. Having received a submission of this nature, the LME will assess the stated
grievance, both for its validity, and against the information provided by the Brand (including, but not
limited to, its RFA or audit reports as applicable). The LME’s powers in respect of probing RFAs will
include compelling Producers to undertake an independent audit of disputed facts. In the event of a
grievance in respect of a Brand’s audit against an internal or external OECD-aligned standard, in the
first instance the LME would expect to refer this back to the auditor or the standard body respectively.
4.4 Timeline
The LME’s timeline for compliance is outlined below.
Figure 8: LME timeline
16

LME responsible sourcing handbook
4.5 LME powers
The LME’s core power is to suspend or delist Brands. The effect would be that no further metal of the
specific Brand could be warranted (or re-warranted) at an LME warehouse. The decision whether to
suspend or delist would be informed primarily by the LME’s assessment as to whether it were possible
for the Brand in question to return to a state of compliance, in which case the suspension could be
lifted. If this seems unlikely, then a full delisting may be more appropriate.
The mechanism by which the LME would effect a suspension or delisting would, necessarily, depend
on the circumstances. In general, the LME aims to give advance notice of a delisting in order to allow
the market a period of time (generally three months) to place residual off-warrant stock into the
warehouse. However, in the event that this might create a disorderly market – for example, the inflow
of significant quantities of lower-quality material into warehouse during the notice period – the LME
does have the right to suspend or delist without notice. This is particularly relevant in the context of
responsible sourcing whereby a Brand which has not made the necessary efforts to meet relevant
standards may trade at a significant discount to the broader metal market. This, therefore, may give
metal owners a strong incentive to “dump” metal of that Brand onto warrant prior to a suspension or
delisting. The market should, therefore, be prepared to accept the possibility of an immediate
suspension or delisting if it is necessary.
While the LME accepts that a greater degree of certainly in respect of timelines for these processes
would provide greater clarity to the market, the LME does believe that in order to act in a fair manner
and to mitigate the risks of creating a disorderly market, it does need to reserve the right to make
decisions on a case-by-case basis.
A second question is whether, in the event of a Brand being delisted due to non-compliance with
relevant responsible sourcing standards, stock of that Brand already on-warrant would need to be
removed. It is in the nature of the LME’s warehousing and warranting model that metal on-warrant
may have been produced some time ago. Given that the LME’s understanding is that the market views
responsible sourcing as a more recent initiative, it is understood that legacy metal may not have been
produced under the same responsible sourcing principles. Accordingly, the LME’s intention is that it
would not be necessary to remove historical metal on the basis that it was not mined in conformance
with responsible sourcing principles at the time of production (given that the LME’s responsible
sourcing requirements would not have been in force at that time). This would apply to any metal on
warrant at the time of the announcement of a delisting or suspension. However, on this topic, the LME
does again propose to retain flexibility such that it is able to take a view on a case by case basis,
subject to the overarching objective criteria set out in the Policy.
For the purposes of this document, the LME refers to “Brand Action” to refer to any action of disclosure,
suspension or delisting (with or without the removal or stock in warehouse, and with or without a notice
period) taken pursuant to the above powers.
5 Conclusion
The LME remains committed to ensuring that all Brands listed for good delivery on the Exchange are
produced in compliance with globally accepted standards for responsible sourcing, and believes that
the above requirements represent a fair, balanced and practical route forward to achieve such an end.
The LME would like to thank all its stakeholders and other market participants, many of whom have
invested considerable time and effort in helping the LME to refine its requirements.
17

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Appendix A: Guidance Note on Track B Audits
1. Purpose of Appendix A
The purpose of Appendix A is to bring a level of consistency and clarity to the audits required for Track
B, the Audited LME RFA Track. The intended audience is both the auditors and Producers choosing
Track B.
LME may revise this guidance based on emerging good practices. The LME regularly engages with
Producers following Track B and its Recognised Auditors to inform this guidance.
2. Audit scope
As stated in the Policy,
“A Producer must, in respect of each Reporting Period, and for each Brand for which it proposes to
apply the Audited LME RFA Track, procure an audit or suitable assurance report, in order to verify
that its LME RFA in respect of the relevant Reporting Period has correctly reached the
conclusion that no OECD Red Flags have arisen, and is based on appropriate and accurate
information (an "Audit Report")”.
Thus, the Track B audit is a verification of information provided by the Producer in the Red Flag
Assessment. The auditor reviews the Producer’s responses to the questions in the LME RFA,
assesses the adequacy of the management systems that led the Producer to those responses through
evidence review, and then provides a statement of assurance. Through Track B, the LME is expecting:
(i) assurance from the auditor that the Producer’s management system could identify OECD Red
Flags and
(ii) verification from the auditor that the Producer did not identify any OECD Red Flags in the
Reporting Period.
Additionally, the auditor will ensure that all other questions, such as Section 3 of the LME RFA
(LOCATION OF MINERAL ORIGIN AND TRANSIT RED FLAG EVALUATION), are complete and the
Producer publicly discloses information as required.
3. Audit standard
The LME accepts audits performed in accordance with International Standard on Assurance
Engagements ISAE 3000, reasonable assurance only, or the ISO 19011:2018 Guidelines for Auditing
Management Systems. The LME will not accept limited assurance engagements or agreed upon
procedures engagements. If an auditor plans to conduct an audit using any other assurance
engagement, please be in touch with the LME prior to the audit.
4. Audit fees
The cost of the audit will be agreed between the auditor and the auditee. Producers may wish to
consider requesting quotes from multiple Recognised Auditors.
5. Evidence required, including on-site or remote audits
The evidence required for the auditors to provide the assurance statement in Appendix A – Section 2
Audit Scope is determined by the auditors and provided by the Producer. The LME expects this will
A - 1

LME responsible sourcing handbook
include document and record review, interviews with the Producer staff, photos, and/or live video tours
and demonstrations. All auditors approved by the LME will have experience with the OECD Guidance
and are expected to use professional judgement regarding the type of information that may assist them
in their assessment.
The LME does not expect that in-person visits to the Producer’s site will be needed in most cases;
however, for complex situations the auditor may decide it is necessary for them to visit the site in order
to provide the adequate level of assurance. This will be agreed upon between the auditor and the
Producer in planning discussions.
6. CAHRA determination
Determining Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas (“CAHRAs”) is part of the Red Flag Assessment.
Please refer to Appendix C – Section 3, which sets out LME’s expectations in regards to what an
“acceptable” CAHRA determination methodology in Producer RFAs should entail.
7. Audit Report (deliverables)
The auditor must provide a report to the Producer that includes the following:
• LME Brand information, to include:
LME Brand Producer name1
LME Brand name(s)6
Reporting Period start date (DD/MM/YYYY)
Reporting Period end date (DD/MM/YYYY)
Date of submission (DD/MM/YYYY)
Address of Brand producing site
Website of Brand Producer
Name of person submitting RFA
Job title of person submitting RFA
Phone number
Email address
In the majority of cases, each Brand will require a unique RFA. However, if multiple Brands are
produced by the same Producer, and the responses to the RFA questions are identical for all said
Brands, one RFA may be submitted for all Brands. All Brand names will need to be included on the
audit report.
• Auditor company name, lead auditor, and any team members supporting the audit
• Methodology applied (ISO 19011 or ISAE 3000, reasonable assurance only)
• Audit scope
• Summary of assessment activities (to include at a minimum the list of documents reviewed
and the number of interviews)
• Summary of findings
• A reasonable assurance conclusion (ISAE 3000) or compliance determination (ISO 19011) for
the elements listed in Section 3.1 Audit Scope
The LME requires a report in English, so an English version must be submitted to the Producer. In
the event of a translation discrepancy between an English version and an original document in a
different language, the English version will prevail so accuracy of translation is imperative.
1 This may be found on the list of LME Approved Brands: https://www.lme.com/en/physical-services/brands/approved-brands
A - 2

LME responsible sourcing handbook
8. Corrective actions, improvement plans, and non-conformances
As stated in Appendix A – Section 2(ii) Audit Scope, the Track B audits are a verification exercise.
There are two possible outcomes: (1) the auditor is able to provide reasonable assurance or a
statement of conformance for the elements included in 2(ii) Audit Scope or (2) the auditor is not.
If the auditor is able to provide reasonable assurance or a statement of conformance for the elements
included in 2(ii) Audit Scope, but discovers other practices that could be improved based on the
auditor’s professional judgement, this should be disclosed in the “summary of findings” in the Audit
Report submitted to the Producer. Implementing the improvement recommendations are not
necessary for compliance with the LME’s rules when provided with a positive assurance statement.
If the auditor is unable to provide reasonable assurance or a statement of conformance for the
elements included in 2(ii) Audit Scope, the auditor will include such a conclusion in the Audit Report.
As stated in the Policy – Section 6.1 Eligibility for Audited LME RFA Track, “For the avoidance of doubt,
in the event that the Audit Report does not confirm the assessment that there are no OECD Red Flags
for the Brand as being correct, the Producer must change Track and apply the Recognised Alignment-
Assessment Standard Track in respect of the Brand.” Referring the Producer to Track A takes the
place of creating any improvement plan or corrective action plan under Track B.
In such cases where switching to Track A will affect the Producer’s ability to meet required Track B
deadline (30 June annually), the Producer must submit the Track B Audit Report to the LME before
switching to Track A. The LME will work with the Producer to agree revised timelines on a case-by-
case basis, as it is expected that the Producer will need time to become familiar with Track A. This is
stated Section 5.7(b) of the Policy, “The LME shall, in its absolute discretion (and acting reasonably)
prescribe the dates from which such Brands must comply with the requirements […].”
If the Producer disagrees with the auditor’s draft or final conclusion and cannot resolve the
disagreement directly with the auditor, it may approach the LME at any time for additional consultation.
9. Submission to the LME
For Track B, the Producer has the responsibility to submit the Audit Report to the LME. The completed
LME RFA may be submitted with the Audit Report, but is not required.
10. LME review
As stated in the Policy in Section 6.5 – LME Review,
“The LME shall be entitled to review the Audit Report and may:
(a) in the event that the LME has concerns or questions regarding any aspect of the Audit Report, the
basis of its production, its conclusions or any of its content, require the Producer to respond to such
concerns or questions and/or procure that the Recognised Auditor do so; and
(b) in the event that the LME is not satisfied with the responses to such concerns or questions, require
the Brand to be reclassified as, and assessed under the requirements for, the Recognised Alignment-
Assessed Standard Track.”
The LME endeavours to complete reviews in a timely manner. In such cases where the Brand must
switch to Track A, the LME will work with the Producer to agree revised timelines on a case-by-case
basis.
A - 3

LME responsible sourcing handbook
11. Public reporting
As stated in the Policy in Section 6.7 – Public disclosure,
“The results of the Audit Report must be disclosed, pursuant to OECD Step 5, not later than the 31
December following submission of the relevant Audit Report to the LME.
Such results must be published on a publicly-accessible website maintained by the Producer, with a
link to such page or pages of the LME's own website as the LME may specify.”
As an example, for the 2021 Reporting Period, Track B Audit Reports must be submitted to the LME
on 30 June 2022 and the Track B Audit Report needs to be publicly available on the Producer’s website
by 31 December 2022. If a specific asset (Brand) is owned by a larger parent company, publication on
the parent company’s website is permissible.
The Producer is responsible for this reporting.
12. Annual assessment
As a reminder, LME requires an annual Audit Report for Track B in line with the Producer’s Reporting
Period. In the event of a change of auditor, the LME encourages Producers to share the previous
Audit Report and LME RFA if it exists with its new auditor. Producers may use the same auditors or
different auditors each year, and may switch from Track A, B, or C for different years as long as there
is not a gap in their Reporting Periods.
A - 4

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Appendix B: Guidance Note on Supplier Red Flags
1. Purpose of Appendix B
Appendix B provides guidance to Producers of LME-listed Brands (“Brands”) in interpreting the two
supplier red flags described in the supplement on tin, tantalum and tungsten (“3T Supplement”) from
the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas (“OECD Guidance”):
 1 The company’s suppliers’ or other known upstream companies have shareholder or other
interests in companies that supply minerals from or operate in one of the above-mentioned1 red flag
locations of mineral origin and transit
 2 The company’s suppliers’ or other known upstream companies are known to have sourced
minerals from a red flag location of mineral origin and transit2 in the last 12 months
Producers can use Appendix B to facilitate their interpretation of the supplier red flags, and
consequently their choice of track to LME responsible sourcing compliance. It should be noted,
however, that these two red flags, along with the three location red flags, are part of the broader OECD
Guidance and as such, this document does not provide a comprehensive guidance to the entirety of
the OECD Guidance, or the LME’s responsible sourcing rules. Brands will need to comply with all the
LME’s requirements as set out in the LME Responsible Sourcing Policy.
2. Scope of the supplier red flags
The decision tree below addresses the minerals in scope for the supplier red flags, and should be read
in conjunction with the glossary underneath which provides further supporting information. Although the
LME believes that primary focus should be on the mineral in question (i.e. the direct supply chain of the
mineral the Brand lists with the LME), that does not mean to say that the broader activities of the supplier
are not of relevance, and due care should be taken in Know Your Customer (“KYC”) checks, as is set
out in the glossary below.
1 This refers to the “red flag locations of mineral origin and transit” found on page 33 in the OECD Guidance
2 Where the term “red flag location of mineral origin and transit” is used, this should be taken to include all three location red
flags found on page 33-34 in the OECD Guidance
B - 1

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Figure i: Supplier red flags flow chart
3. Specific guidance for the first supplier red flag
Alongside mineral scope, the first red flag also addresses the issue of suppliers and other known
upstream companies having shareholder or other interests in companies that supply minerals from or
operate in red flag locations of mineral origin and transport. For the purposes of this analysis,
“shareholder interest” may be interpreted as a majority shareholder interest, and “other interest” may
be interpreted as a controlling interest achieved through a route other than a shareholding.
The LME’s view is that companies in which suppliers and other upstream companies have an interest
that have no relation to the supply of minerals (in particular, the mineral in question as outlined in the
decision tree above) fall out of scope, and potential red flags associated with these entities may be
explained without requiring the use of Track A. In this instance, the Brand would need to be comfortable
that the relevant company does not supply minerals and that any concerns raised during initial KYC
checks are investigated appropriately. If the relevant company does supply minerals, then the list of
countries in scope would include the locations from which they supply minerals and in which they
operate.
Although suppliers with whom Brands are in a direct business relationship (including immediate
suppliers) will be most in focus, upstream suppliers (i.e. suppliers of suppliers), should also be
considered.
As an example, Company X could be supplying Brand A with feedstock, which it sources from a tier 1
B - 2

LME responsible sourcing handbook
(or immediate) supplier which operates a very high level of due diligence (Supplier A). Correspondingly,
the chain of custody goes Supplier A → Company X → Brand A and there are no concerns. However,
if Supplier A is itself sourcing from Supplier B who does not conduct any due diligence, then more
extensive knowledge of the supply chain is needed, or there is a risk that Supplier B is supplying non-
responsibly sourced metal into the supply chain.
In both cases, it is worth considering companies that set up different legal entities, despite effectively
being the same company, in order to circumvent rules such as these. Brands could be sourcing from
a legal entity that only sources from non-CAHRAs, but that same company (under a different legal entity
name) also sources from CAHRAs. That does not mean Brands will necessarily raise a red flag, but
Brands will need to undertake due diligence and appropriate KYC checks to ensure they are clear on
the material being received, and the broader activity of the companies within their mineral supply chain.
Equally, Brands need to be conscious of companies that are headquartered or registered in one
location, but operate in an alternative location. A Brand needs to be comfortable that the information
they are supplied with (and in turn, submit for compliance purposes) is accurate and has been compiled
in good faith i.e. that a supplier has not attempted to disguise areas of concern by using a different
location (such as headquarters).
Glossary3 and other information
Term Definition
Known upstream Below are the OECD definitions of “upstream / upstream
companies companies” from the OECD Guidance:
Defined in the 3T Supplement (p.32):
o
 “For the purposes of this Supplement ‘upstream’
means the mineral supply chain from the mine to
smelters/refiners. ‘Upstream companies’ include
miners (artisanal and small-scale or large-scale
producers)4, local traders or exporters from the
country of mineral origin, international concentrate
traders, mineral re-processors and smelters/refiners
[…]”
In the Gold supplement (p.70):
o
 “‘Upstream supply chain’ means the gold supply chain
from the mine to refiners. ‘Upstream companies’
include miners (artisanal and small-scale enterprises
or medium and large-scale gold mining companies),5
local gold traders or exporters from the country of gold
origin, transporters, international gold traders of
Mined/Recyclable Gold and refiners. Artisanal and
small-scale gold producers such as individuals,
informal working groups or communities are not
expected included as upstream companies for the
purposes of carrying out due diligence in line with this
Guidance, although they are encouraged to remain
involved in due diligence efforts of their customers and
formalise so they can carry out due diligence in the
future”
3 Explained terms are in order of appearance
4 From 3T supplement: ‘”Upstream companies” includes artisanal or small-scale producing enterprises, rather than individuals
or informal working groups of artisanal miners'.
5 From Gold supplement: “For the avoidance of doubt, these guidelines include miners, processors and refiners which may be
owned or otherwise controlled or directed by governments or other State entities.”
B - 3

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Known upstream companies include immediate suppliers and any
known actors further upstream which are identifiable through
general business dealings or public reports (or other publicly
available information) to the extent necessary to enable a red flag
review.
Immediate supplier is the entity which has a contract with and
supplies mineral or material to the smelter and is immediately
before the smelter in the supply chain. This could include (but is
not limited to):
• Tier 1 suppliers in addition to other upstream companies
including miners (artisanal and small-scale or large-scale
producers)
• Local traders or exporters from the country of mineral origin
• International concentrate traders
• Mineral re-processors
• Smelters/refiners involved in the extraction, trade, handling,
export, processing or refining of minerals that may have
entered the company’s feedstock
CAHRA Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Area
Additional checks to The level of rigour applied to this check should be commensurate
verify the company’s with the nature of the commodity and risk. Commodities that are
feedstock is in fact is as more fungible, more frequently blended, or more easily laundered
stated should be subject to a higher level of scrutiny and verification,
although this red flag is primarily determined by knowledge and
evaluation of the supplier.
Please refer to Step 1 of the five-step framework in the OECD
Guidance for further information on these checks
Verify through public Basic KYC checks are considered a necessity for any supplier.
sources, Know Your
Customer (“KYC”) Brands should carry out at least a minimum level of due diligence
checks and engagement on the supplier’s corporate-level, company-wide policies,
with suppliers (including management systems and practices and ensure strong
spot check if engagement with the supplier (Step 1 from the OECD Guidance).
appropriate) that Brands should seek credible evidence including, but not limited to,
supplier has strong the supplier’s annual public report, ensure that the supplier carries
company-wide due out due diligence in line with the Guidance’s five step framework,
diligence management in particular in relation to the mineral in question. This is to verify
systems that any CAHRA with which the Brand’s operations or sourcing
practices may be associated are identified, and any Annex II risks
identified, and potentially mitigated.
The aim of this step is to verify the trustworthiness of suppliers,
particularly insomuch as weak transparency or suspect
representations on the sourcing of any material could call into
question representations made in respect of another. This
approach is focused on identifying serious allegations of
misconduct among suppliers, and should also help Brands avoid
sanctions violations.
Utilising OECD Step 5 reporting can provide a way to meet this
minimum requirement for corporate-level, company-wide due
diligence on a company’s supplier. Such reporting may be made
B - 4

LME responsible sourcing handbook
as part of a single Step 5 report, or through other reporting
frameworks as long they are publicly accessible and clearly
identified e.g. a supplier’s annual report. However, the existence
of a Step 5 report alone is insufficient. Disclosures should include
information on company management systems relevant to the due
diligence process, publish the company assessment of risks, and
describe the steps taken to manage risks.
As part of the process of conducting due diligence on a supplier’s
corporate-level, company-wide due diligence, a Brand should, on
a risk-based basis, also cross-check public disclosures of the
supplier against other sources. For example, if a tier 1 supplier
makes a complete Step 5 disclosure that appears to attest to
strong due diligence throughout their operations, but public
reporting or other information gleaned from general business
dealings on a tier 3 supplier in the same supply chain contradicts
such disclosures and/or provides information about a risk or
adverse impact that has not been addressed in the tier 1 supplier’s
disclosures, this should lead to bilateral engagement in order to
verify the allegations, including through spot checks as appropriate
Brands should always conduct KYC checks on suppliers, including
in relation to breaches of national and international laws and
sanctions violations. The Financial Action Taskforce (“FATF”) also
has useful recommendations on this topic
If unverifiable through Unsatisfactory disclosures from a supplier and/or information that
public sources, conduct conflicts with such disclosures should lead to bilateral engagement
bilateral engagement in order to better understand the supplier’s sourcing and due
(and spot checks as diligence practices, and should include capacity building and
appropriate) measurement improvement standards in order to improve the
quality and completeness of the supplier’s disclosures as an
integral part of the OECD five step framework in the future
Satisfactory versus What is considered to be a satisfactory level of verification on due
unsatisfactory results in diligence of suppliers or other known upstream companies is
verifying due diligence highly context-specific. For the purposes of the flowchart, an
unsatisfactory outcome should be understood to mean that, on the
basis of all information collected (through desk research, bilateral
engagement, etc.) there is still a reasonable risk that material from
a CAHRA has entered the Brand’s feedstock
B - 5

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Appendix C: Guidance Note on Conflict-Affected and High-
Risk Areas (“CAHRAs”)
1. Purpose of Appendix C
In February 2023, the LME published the results of its Request for Feedback on minor amendments to
the LME Policy on Responsible Sourcing of LME-Listed Brands (“the Policy”), including a summary of
feedback received from the market (for full details, see Notice 23/201 – “Amendments to the LME
responsible sourcing policy”).
As part of this process, the LME formalised the requirement for Producers of its listed Brands complying
through Tracks B (Audited LME RFA Track) and Track C (Published LME RFA Track) to provide a
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas determination methodology in their Red Flag Assessment
(“RFA”)1. The LME believes that this determination is a key aspect to operating an effective supply
chain due diligence, and is an expected part of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development’s (“OECD”) Due Diligence Guidance on Responsible Sourcing of Minerals from Conflict-
Affected and High-Risk Areas (“OECD Guidance”). Previous versions of the Policy had not made the
requirement to provide this methodology explicit, hence its inclusion in the revised Policy provided with
the Request for Feedback.
The majority of the respondents to the Request for Feedback supported this proposal, but suggested
that the LME clarifies its expectations regarding an “acceptable” methodology for Tracks B and C. The
LME recognises the value of this request, and is now publishing this guidance note to that end. It
includes the LME’s expectations for Producer’s CAHRA determination process (Section 4) and
resources (Section 5).
Once Producers provide their CAHRA determination methodology in the RFA, the LME requires this
information to be included in the public disclosure of the RFA in line with the transparency timeline as
set out in the Policy section 7.6 for Track C. Though not directly referenced in the OECD Guidance,
disclosure is important for several reasons. First and foremost, transparency is a key aspect of Track C
and transparent CAHRA determination is one of the ways to build trust in the due diligence system.
Additionally, public disclosure can lead to increased stakeholder engagement and dialogue, as
interested parties can review a Producer's methodology. This can help identify areas for improvement
and ensure that Producers are taking a comprehensive and proactive approach to assess potential
supply chain risks. Lastly, Producers complying through Track A (Recognised Alignment-Assessment
Standard Track) are required to report their CAHRA determination methodologies and the LME aims to
bring more alignment between disclosure practices between Producers following Tracks A, B, and C.
To this end, the LME will also continue to work with auditors to clarify expectations and monitor the Step
5 reports for the Producers following Track B.
The LME does not dictate a specific methodology for determining CAHRAs and leaves this decision up
to the Producer. The LME expects that the Producers have the best access to information about areas
from which they source and thus are best placed to determine what is considered a CAHRA. It is
important for Producers to conduct their own research and analysis to determine the risks associated
with operating in specific regions or regions that are relevant to their production. As noted in the Policy,
the LME did anticipate that some Producers may wish to use CAHRA lists provided by third parties and
1 Full details on the Tracks to compliance, and other aspects of the Policy can be found on the website:
https://www.lme.com/en/About/Responsibility/Responsible-sourcing or by contacting responsiblesourcing@lme.com.
C - 1

LME responsible sourcing handbook
believes this is acceptable should the methodology prove appropriate. This document provides
resources that Producers may find helpful as they work to determine CAHRAs.
2. Definition of a CAHRA
In line with the Policy for Tracks B and C, the LME expects that the definition of a CAHRA will be as set
out in the “Supplement on Gold” of the OECD Guidance, page 66:
Conflict-affected and high-risk areas2 – Areas identified by the presence of armed conflict,
widespread violence, including violence generated by criminal networks, or other risks of serious
and widespread harm to people. Armed conflict may take a variety of forms, such as a conflict of
international or non-international character, which may involve two or more states, or may consist
of wars of liberation, or insurgencies, civil wars. High-risk areas are those where there is a high risk
of conflict or of widespread or serious abuses as defined in paragraph 1 of Annex II of the Guidance.
Such areas are often characterised by political instability or repression, institutional weakness,
insecurity, collapse of civil infrastructure, widespread violence and violations of national or
international law.
The exception to this is for existing Track A standards, which have already been alignment-assessed,
and which prefer to maintain the CAHRA definition from the main section of the OECD Guidance rather
than the definition in the “Supplement on Gold”.
3. The LME’s expectations
In question 2.g. of the RFA, the Producer of the LME Brand is expected to provide a description of:
(i) The resources or reference data used in the CAHRA determination methodology;
(ii) The decision-making processes that are followed to reach CAHRA determination decisions; and
(iii) How frequently the CAHRA determination procedure is updated.
The list of resources can include educational institutions, government sources, peer-reviewed
databases, independent consultancies, and other sources from professional organisations. The
resources should be relevant to Input Material’s type. For example, the indicative, non-exhaustive list
of conflict-affected and high-risk areas under Regulation (EU) 2017/821 is designed for areas relevant
to the production of tin, tantalum, tungsten, or gold3. Producers of other metals may refer to this list, but
will need additional references that are relevant to their metal type.
The Producer’s methodology should not be engineered to arrive at any specific result. CAHRAs may
be determined at the national or sub-national level.
4. Resources
4.1 Third-party CAHRA mapping tools
This section provides tools that may be used to inform the Producer’s CAHRA determination
methodology. The LME does not adopt any of these tools as its own method, nor any specific CAHRA
2 OECD (2016), OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-
Risk Areas: Third Edition, OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264252479-en
3 Bellasio, Jacopo, Anna Knack, Victoria Jordan, and Ruth Harris, Provision of an indicative, non-exhaustive list of conflict-
affected and high-risk areas under Regulation 2017/821: Task A – Methodology development, RAND Corporation, RR-A158-1,
2020. As of January 12, 2023: https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA158-1.html.
C - 2

LME responsible sourcing handbook
list. The resources are simply provided to assist Producers in formulating their own systems to
determine CAHRAs. The LME encourages Producers to seek multiple sources when formulating a
CAHRA determination methodology.
The following sources may provide useful information and guidance in respect of CAHRAs:
• Responsible Minerals Initiative
Overview (free)
o
RMI CAHRAs Guidance (free)
o
RMI Global Risk Map, including CAHRAs (auditee and members access only)
o
• TDI Sustainability CAHRA index (free)
• Kumi Consulting CAHRA Map (subscription access only)
• The indicative, non-exhaustive list of conflict-affected and high-risk areas under Regulation
(EU) 2017/821, relevant to tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold (free)
Many of the resources provided above are built from a synthesis of quantitative indicators such as the
Heidelberg Institute for International Conflict Research Conflict Barometer, Global Peace Index,
Corruption Perceptions Index and sanctions lists. Qualitative and real-time information – including
information directly from the suppliers of material, industry groups, media, and civil society reports –
may be useful to incorporate as well.
4.2 Track A standard CAHRA determination requirements, information and
advice
The LME aims to see consistent implementation of the OECD Guidance across Tracks A, B, and C.
Producers following Track A will be following the CAHRA determination requirements of their chosen
standard, all of which are shown below. Producers following Tracks B and C may find the CAHRA
determination criteria required by Track A standards helpful for meeting best practices, thus these are
included as additional references in Table 1.
Table 1 CAHRA determination requirements and advice from Track A standards4
Standard CAHRA determination requirements and advice
Aluminium “Table 5 - Examples of resources you may find useful in
Stewardship Initiative identifying red flags and CAHRAs. In general terms, credible
Performance Standard resources may include:
V3 (2022), page 170
• Research reports from governments, international
organisations, civil society and media
• Maps, UN reports and UN Security Council sanction lists,
OECD reports
• Relevant industry literature on Bauxite extraction and impacts
on conflict and Human Rights
• Information raised through your Complaints Resolution
Mechanism.
4 References in Table 1 are taken in-part or wholly from Track A standard guidance; standards may have additional information
on their websites that is relevant to CAHRA determination requirements.
C - 3

LME responsible sourcing handbook
• Keep records of how you reviewed and considered credible
sources of information on potential CAHRAs and red flags that
you can show to an ASI Auditor.
• Make sure you regularly review and evaluate your risks,
especially when forming relationships with new suppliers or
when existing suppliers change their sourcing practices.”
Chinese Due Diligence “Red flag locations of mineral origin and transit, description of
Guidelines for supporting document/evidence:
Responsible Mineral • Procedure for identifying Conflict-Affected and High-Risk
Supply Chains Areas (including references)
(second edition) 19
May 2022, page 29, • Identification checklist of Conflict-Affected and High-Risk
33 Areas
• Certificates of origin/customs declaration
documents/transportation documents of all minerals
• UN report
• NGO report
• Media reports etc.
5.2.1.3 The warning signs screening process can refer to the
information released by highly recognized international
institutions. The sources of information can include reports from
governments agencies, international organizations, civil society
organizations, worker representatives and trade unions, national
human rights institutions, think tank, the media, or other experts. If
the information is incomplete, the opinions of relevant
stakeholders and experts can be consulted”
Cobalt Refiner Supply “To identify Red Flags or warning signs, the Company shall:
Chain Due Diligence
Design and implement a process to determine any CAHRAs as
Standard 19 August
defined by the Chinese Guidelines or OECD Guidance in its
2021, page 18
supply chain. The process shall include, at a minimum:
• The types of resources used by the refiner to identify
CAHRAs11;
• The tool and/or criteria used by the Company to determine a
CAHRA12;
• The frequency within which the determination is reviewed and
updated.
• A record of all the countries and / or areas identified as a
Conflict-Affected or High-Risk within the Company’s supply
chain.”
11Companies may refer to available resources to determine CAHRAs, such as the
indicative list of CAHRAs provided by the European Commission pursuant to
Article 14.2 of the EU Regulation (EU) 2017/821, or those provided by OECD-
aligned initiatives, or assurance mechanisms, etc
12The Company must identify reasonable thresholds for determining CAHRAs,
where indices are referenced
C - 4

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Joint Due Diligence “5.2.3.1. CAHRA Determination
Standard for Copper,
To identify red flags, the company shall design and implement a
Lead, Nickel and Zinc
reasonable process to determine CAHRAs. As part of the CAHRA
rev. 3, 26 August 2022,
determination process, the company shall:
page 22
• Adopt and consistently implement a methodology or process
to make the CAHRA determination, including establishing the
frequency at which the CAHRA determination is reviewed and
updated.
• Adopt and record credible sources of information and
resources used to make the CAHRA determination. The
company may refer to resources provided by a Joint Initiative
or Institutionalised Mechanism, or indicative list of CAHRAs
issued by governments.
• Document the CAHRA determination process and its findings.
Credible source: Generally, a credible source is one that has been
recently published (3–5 years); is extracted from an academic
peer-reviewed database; or, from a website registered by
government or educational institution (.gov, .edu, .ac); is written
by respected and well-known authors or institutions such as the
UN, think-tanks, or research institutions.”
London Bullion “Step 2. Identify and Assess Supply Chain Risks
Market Association The objective of Step 2 is to identify actual and potential adverse
Responsible Gold impacts with respect to OECD Annex II and consider adverse
Guidance Version 9 ESG factors in the Refiner’s gold supply chain. Due diligence is
November 2021, page expected to be proportional to the business activities of each
22 Refiner and its supply chains. An integrated due diligence process
that considers sourcing from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk
Areas (CAHRAs) as well as additional location-, supplier- or type
of material-based high risks is considered most effective.
Sources of such an integrated assessment must include, but are
not limited to:
• Sanctions lists (US, UK, EU, UN, and relevant sanctions lists)
• Dodd Frank s. 1502
• EU CAHRA list
• Heidelberg Barometer
• Fragile States Index or equivalent
• UN Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner or
equivalent
• Reports (including relevant country reports) by the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF)
• Credible market intelligence on high-risk gold centres/transit
hubs and on countries where there is a high risk of money
laundering.
C - 5

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Refiners should also consider credible market intelligence to
cover the risk factors included in Step 1.1, as relevant”
RMI Global “Design and implement a process to determine any CAHRAs. The
Responsible Sourcing list of CAHRAs must include, at a minimum:
Due Diligence
• The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and its nine
Standard for Mineral
Supply Chains All adjoining countries as outlined in Section 1502 of the Dodd
Minerals 15 December Frank Act, namely Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic,
2022, page 18 Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania,
Uganda, and Zambia
• the indicative list of CAHRAs provided by the European
Commission pursuant to Article 14.2 of the European Union
Regulation 2017/821
The process to determine any CAHRAs must include, at a
minimum:
5.1. The types of resources used by the company to identify
CAHRAs13;
5.2. The criteria used by the company to determine a CAHRA;
5.3. The frequency within which the determination is reviewed and
updated;
5.4. A record of all the countries and/or areas identified as a
Conflict-Affected or High-Risk within the Company’s supply chain;
and
5.5. Include in the process a general consultation of relevant
national and international sanctions lists.”
13Companies may refer to available resources to determine CAHRAs, such as
those listed by the US Dodd-Frank Act Section 1502 and the indicative list of
CAHRAs provided by the European Commission pursuant to Article 14.2 of the EU
Regulation (EU) 2017/821, or those provided by OECD-aligned initiatives, or
assurance mechanisms.
RMI Tin and Tantalum “Identification Of Conflict Affected And High-Risk Areas:
Standard 7 February
The auditee shall design and implement a reasonable process to
2020, page 15
determine if there are any Conflict Affected and High-Risk Areas
(CAHRAs) as defined by the OECD Guidance in its supply chain.
The process shall include, at a minimum:
• The types of resources used by the smelter to identify
CAHRAs22;
• The criteria used by the smelter make a CAHRA determination
23;
• The frequency within which the determination is reviewed and
updated.
The auditee shall record the countries and / or areas identified as
CAHRA. The CAHRAs list shall include, at a minimum, countries
identified as high-risk by relevant conflict minerals regulations.24
Auditees may refer to the program website for further information
on the identification of CAHRAs.25”
C - 6

LME responsible sourcing handbook
22 The smelter may refer to resources provided by joint initiatives, institutionalized
mechanisms, or government bodies. The resources must cover the areas of
conflict, governance, and human rights. Primary resources should be
internationally-recognized, secondary resources could include other credible
information sources.
23 The smelter must identify reasonable thresholds for determining CAHRAs,
where indices are referenced.
24 The list of CAHRAs must include, at a minimum: 1) The Democratic Republic of
the Congo (DRC) and its nine adjoining countries as outlined in Section 1502 of
the Dodd Frank Act, namely Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia; and 2) the
indicative list of CAHRAs provided by the European Commission pursuant to
Article 14.2 of the European Union Regulation 2017/821.
https://www.cahraslist.net
25 http://www.responsiblemineralsinitiative.org/minerals-due-diligence/risk-
management/conflict-affected-and-high-risk-areas
Tin Code (Standard “Design and implement a reasonable process to determine
7.3 Responsible CAHRAs from which tin minerals may be produced as follows.
Sourcing) assessed The company may refer to resources provided by aligned joint
with the ITA-RMI initiatives, institutionalized mechanisms or indicative list of
Assessment Criteria CAHRAs provided by the European Commission pursuant to
(version 2) 23 Article 14.2 of the EU Regulation to inform the design and
March 2021, page 17 implementation of the process.
4.1. Record the types of information and resources used by the
company to identify CAHRAs
4.2. Establish a method or procedure to make a CAHRA
determination
4.3. Establish the frequency at which the CAHRA determination is
reviewed and updated
4.4. Include in the process a general evaluation of relevant
national and international sanctions lists”
*National or international sanctions lists: Includes the U.S. List
of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (“SDN
List”); the U.S. Foreign Sanctions Evaders List (“FSE List”); the UK
Consolidated List of Targets; the Consolidated List of Persons,
Groups and Entities subject to EU Financial Sanctions; and United
Nations sanctions lists.
ITA notes: Companies may additionally refer to other ITA
information including the Criteria Guidance and ITA Supporting
Note on CAHRA (Tin Code reporting companies only).
C - 7

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Appendix D: Guidance Note on ISO 14001 and ISO 45001
Compliance
1. Purpose of Appendix D
The LME Policy on Responsible Sourcing of LME-Listed Brands (“LME Responsible Sourcing Policy”)
requires that Producers of LME-listed Brands (“Brands”) are each certified as compliant with ISO 14001
and ISO 45001 (or Equivalent Certification Programmes (“ECPs”)), in respect of the production methods
applied at the facility at which the Brand is produced.
This section outlines:
• The LME’s position on the migration of OHSAS 18001 to ISO 45001
• The routes to achieving compliance with ISO, and / or equivalent certification programmes
• The auditors / assessors which may be used in conducting ISO and equivalence assessments
Capitalised terms not otherwise defined in this guidance note shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in the LME Responsible Sourcing Policy.
2. OHSAS 18001 Migration to ISO 45001
ISO 45001’s replacement of OHSAS 18001 was published on 12 March 2018, and ISO specified a three
year migration period ending on 11 March 2021. ISO has specified that OHSAS 18001 certification will
only be recognised until the end of the migration period. As such, Brands will be expected to be certified
on ISO 45001 by the LME’s first ISO deadline of 31 December 2023.
3. Routes to compliance
There are two options for Producers to meet their LME environmental and occupational health
management certification compliance, as summarised in Figure 1:
• Obtain and maintain ISO 14001 and ISO 45001 certification
• Obtain and maintain certification from an Equivalent Certification Programme
An ECP can be a standalone (internal or external) management system standard or a Track A standard
that has been assessed as incorporating all the ISO requirements. Please note that should national,
regional or international regulatory requirements also reflect certification equivalence (and be subject
to an appropriate audit), the LME will also accept this as a route to equivalence.
To recognise ECP, an initial equivalence assessment conducted by an independent auditor will be
required to establish that the certification programme covers all the ISO requirements. The equivalence
assessment is a one-off assessment, unless the equivalent certification programme undergoes material
revision, in which case the equivalence assessment will need to be reconfirmed. Any auditor that is
qualified to conduct ISO 14001 and 45001 audits in a relevant jurisdiction should be able to conduct the
equivalence assessment, but before beginning any assessment, the auditor will need to be approved
by the LME via email to responsiblesourcing@lme.com. Please note that this is separate to the
approved auditors for Track B.
Brand compliance is evidenced to the LME by provision of certification or equivalent documentation.
D - 1

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Figure ii: ISO compliance flow chart
Option 1 – Obtain and maintain ISO 14001 and ISO 45001 certification
The process for Producers wishing to comply via direct ISO certification is as follows:
(i) Review ISO 14001 and ISO 45001 certification requirements – these can be accessed via the
ISO website1. Note that an integrated approach to include ISO 9001, 14001, and 45001 is also
an option.
(ii) Ensure corresponding management systems are in place at the Brand-producing site. The
scope should include the smelting or the equivalent step, in all cases being the final substantive
step resulting in the production of LME grade metal
(iii) Obtain a valid certification in line with ISO requirements
(iv) Send to the certificates to the LME by (or before) the LME certification deadline of 31 December
2023 via email to responsiblesourcing@lme.com
(v) Producers are to ensure that the LME is at all times in receipt of an unexpired, valid copy of
each certification. Producers should also notify the LME should there be any change to
certification status
(vi) Optional: Producers may choose to disclose their certification on LMEpassport. For more
information, please refer to the LME website2
Option 2 – Obtain and maintain certification from an Equivalent Certification Programme
(i) Producer identifies a certification programme that it wishes to use for compliance
(ii) Producer reviews the LME website3 for ECPs already accepted by the LME. If the Producer’s
intended ECP is listed then move directly to step (vii); if not continue to step (iii)
(iii) Producer obtains permission of the certification programme owner if relevant and identifies an
auditor who is qualified to conduct ISO 14001 and 45001 audits in a relevant jurisdiction. The
1 https://www.iso.org/certification.html
2 https://www.lme.com/en/about/Responsibility/Sustainability/Sustainability-disclosures-on-LMEpassport
3 https://www.lme.com/en/About/Responsibility/Responsible-sourcing/Approved-partners
D - 2

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Producer sends the permission confirmation and proposed auditor name and credentials to the
LME via email to responsiblesourcing@lme.com
(iv) If LME accepts the proposed auditor, the Producer, the certification programme, or an agreed
entity retains the auditor to conduct an equivalence assessment. The LME is available to
answer questions on this process as needed
(v) Auditor conducts the assessment and if the auditor agrees that the certification programme is
equivalent, sends report with the conclusion and the summary of findings to the LME for review
(vi) LME reviews the report and ratifies the equivalence, assuming no concerns are raised. The
ECP can be listed on the LME website if the ECP owner agrees
(vii) Producer obtains valid certificates in line with the ECP’s requirements
(viii) Producer sends the certificates to the LME by (or before) the deadline of 31 December 2023
via email to responsiblesourcing@lme.com
(ix) Producers are to ensure that the LME is at all times in receipt of an unexpired, valid copy of
each certification. Producers should also notify the LME should there be any change to
certification status
(x) Optional: Producers may choose to disclose their certification on LMEpassport if ECP is an
approved disclosure. For more information, please refer to the LME website4
4. Auditor qualifications
Dependent on the route to compliance chosen, Producers may need to retain the services of an auditor.
This section clarifies which auditors may be used for which step.
Audit of Brand against ISO 14001 and ISO 45001
ISO develops and maintains ISO standards but does not maintain lists of approved auditors or audit
companies capable of assessing these standards. Auditor accreditations are issued independently of
ISO by various national and international ISO member auditor certification bodies that operate globally.
Certification bodies have lists of approved auditors, but there is no single global database for all qualified
auditors.
The LME will recognise auditors accredited by ISO member certification bodies which may be found
here: https://www.iso.org/certification.html. This gives Producers the opportunity to choose qualified
auditors from a variety of bodies in the relevant location.
Equivalence assessment of a certification programme against ISO 14001 and/or ISO 45001
Any auditor that is qualified to conduct ISO 14001 and 45001 audits in a relevant jurisdiction should be
able to conduct the equivalence assessment, but before beginning any assessment, the auditor will
need to be approved by the LME via email to responsiblesourcing@lme.com.
Audit of Brand against ECP
The LME will accept auditors accredited by ISO member certification bodies to assess a Brand’s
compliance with an ECP. The ECP may have its own list of accredited auditors, in which case the
Producer must follow the ECP’s rules for acceptable auditors.
4 https://www.lme.com/en/about/Responsibility/Sustainability/Sustainability-disclosures-on-LMEpassport
D - 3

LME responsible sourcing handbook
Glossary
Term Definition
Equivalent Certification means a certification programme that has been deemed by the
Programme LME to be equivalent to, or an improvement upon, the ISO 14001
and ISO 45001 certifications as described in the LME
Responsible Sourcing Policy
ISO 14001 means the international standard prescribed by the International
Organization for Standardization that specifies the framework
requirements for an effective environmental management
system. All references to ISO 14001 in this document are to the
latest version – ISO 14001: 2015
ISO 45001 means the international standard prescribed by the International
Organization for Standardization that specifies the framework
requirements to improve employee safety, reduce workplace
risks and create better, safer working conditions, all over the
world. All references to ISO 45001 in this document are to the
latest version – ISO 45001: 2019
OHSAS 18001 is a British Standard framework for an occupational health and
safety management system (officially known as BS OHSAS
18001)
D - 4

Classification: Internal
LME responsible sourcing handbook
Appendix E: Assurance summary table
What is the process for these Useful
Audit / assurance / assessment requirement Who is this for? Which auditors can be used? Where can I find these auditors?
auditors to be approved? documents
Alignment assessment of External standards or
Completion of the LME's
an internal or external internal standards wishing Any Recognised Alignment Alignment Assessor
alignment assessment company application
standard against the to become a Recognised Assessors on the LME On the LME website
company and lead alignment
OECD Due Diligence Alignment-Assessed approved list
assessor application forms
Guidance Standard Alignment Assessor
1) Completion of the LME's
1) Any Recognised Auditor on
Audit of brand compliance 1) On the LME website audit company and lead
Track A the LME approved list Audit company
with an internal Brands using an internal 2) On the website of the external auditor application forms
2) Any auditor approved by an
Recognised Alignment- standard under Track A Recognised Alignment-Assessed 2) As set out by the external
external Recognised Alignment-
Assessed Standard Standard Recognised Alignment-
Assessed Standard Lead Auditor
Assessed Standard
Audit of brand compliance Any auditor approved by the
On the website of the external As set out by the relevant
with an external Brands using an external external Recognised Alignment-
Recognised Alignment-Assessed external Recognised N/A
Recognised Alignment- standard under Track A Assessed Standard being used
Standard Alignment-Assessed Standard
Assessed Standard for Track A compliance
Audit of brand completion Completion of LME's audit Audit company
Brands using the Audited Any Recognised Auditor on the
Track B of a Red Flag On the LME website company and lead auditor
LME RFA Track (Track B) LME approved list
Assessment (“RFA”) application forms
Lead Auditor
Brands using ISO 14001
and ISO 45001 to meet Auditor accreditations are not issued by
Audit of brand compliance environmental and Any auditor accredited by an ISO, but by national / international ISO
As set out by ISO
with ISO requirements occupational health ISO member certification body member certification bodies, which
management provide lists of approved auditors
requirements
Certification Programme
Assessment of
Owners wishing for a Any auditor accredited by an Auditor accreditations are not issued by
equivalence of a As set out by ISO, plus an
ISO 14001 Certification Programme ISO member certification body, ISO, but by national / international ISO
Certification Programme email introduction to the LME
and ISO to be approved as an with LME review prior to work member certification bodies, which Appendix D
against the ISO with qualifications
45001 Equivalent Certification starting provide lists of approved auditors
requirements
Programme
Brands using Equivalent
Certification Programmes
1) Any auditor approved by the
Audit of brand compliance to meet their 1) On the website of the ECP
ECP 1) As set out by the ECP
against an Equivalent environmental and 2) On the ISO website:
2) Any auditor accredited by an 2) As set out by ISO
Certification Programme occupational health https://www.iso.org/certification.html
ISO member certification body
management
requirements
E - 1