OECD Due Diligence Guidance
for Responsible supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
THiRD EDiTiOn
Contents
Recommendation of the Council on Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply
Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
Supplement on tin, tantalum and tungsten
Supplement on gold
isbn 978-92-64-25238-7
20 2016 02 1 P
OECD
Due
Diligence
Guidance
for
Responsible
supply
Chains
of
Minerals
from
Conflict-Affected
and
High-Risk
Areas
OECD Due Diligence
Guidance for Responsible
supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas
THiRD EDiTiOn
Consult this publication on line at http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264252479-en.
This work is published on the OECD iLibrary, which gathers all OECD books, periodicals and
statistical databases.
Visit www.oecd-ilibrary.org for more information.

OECD Due Diligence
Guidance for Responsible
Supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas

This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of
or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and
boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
Please cite this publication as:
OECD (2016), OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas: Third Edition, OECD Publishing, Paris.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264252479-en
ISBN 978-92-64-25238-7 (print)
ISBN 978-92-64-25247-9 (PDF)
Photo credits: Cover © Hemera/Thinkstock.com
Corrigenda to OECD publications may be found on line at: www.oecd.org/publishing/corrigenda.
© OECD 2016
You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from OECD
publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs, websites and
teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright owner is given.
All requests for public or commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to rights@oecd.org.
Requests for permission to photocopy portions of this material for public or commercial use shall be addressed
directly to the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC) at info@copyright.com or the Centre français d’exploitation du
droit de copie (CFC) at contact@cfcopies.com.

FOREWORD
Foreword
T
he OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas (“the Guidance”) is the first example
of a collaborative government-backed multi-stakeholder initiative on responsible
supply chain management of minerals from conflict-affected areas. Its objective is to
help companies respect human rights and avoid contributing to conflict through their
mineral sourcing practices. The Guidance is also intended to cultivate transparent
mineral supply chains and sustainable corporate engagement in the mineral sector
with a view to enabling countries to benefit from their mineral resources and
preventing the extraction and trade of minerals from becoming a source of conflict,
human rights abuses, and insecurity. With its Supplements on Tin, Tantalum,
Tungsten and Gold, the OECD Guidance provides companies with a complete package
to source minerals responsibly in order for trade in those minerals to support peace and
development and not conflict.
The Guidance was developed through a multi-stakeholder process with in-depth
engagement from OECD and eleven countries of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (Angola, Burundi, Central African Republic, Republic of Congo,
Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and
Zambia), industry, civil society, as well as the United Nations Group of Experts on the
DRC. Five multi-stakeholder consultations were held to develop the Guidance and its
two Supplements, with four in Paris in December 2009 and April 2010 as well as May
and November 2011. A joint ICGLR-OECD consultation was held in Nairobi in
September 2010 where Brazil, Malaysia and South Africa were also represented. As a
result, the Guidance is practically-oriented, with emphasis on collaborative constructive
approaches to complex challenges.
The United Nations Security Council resolution1952 (2010) [S/RES/1952(2010)]
supported taking forward the due diligence recommendations contained in the final
report of the United Nations Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
designed to be consistent with the OECD Due Diligence Guidance.
The Guidance has been approved by the OECD Investment Committee and the
OECD Development Assistance Committee, and has been endorsed by the eleven
member states of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) in
the Lusaka Declaration, adopted on 15December2010.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 3

FOREWORD
An OECD Recommendation on the Due Diligence Guidance was adopted by
Council at Ministerial level on 25May2011, amended on 17 July 2012 to include a
reference to the Supplement on Gold and again amended on 25 September 2015
following approval by the Investment Committee and the Development Assistance
Committee of changes to the Introduction to the Guidance. While not legally binding,
the Recommendation reflects the common position and political commitment of OECD
members and non-member adherents.
This third edition of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply
Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas provides
clarification on the scope of the Guidance by removing language in the Introduction that
was perceived to limit its application only to the supply chains of tin, tantalum, tungsten
and gold. The updated edition now clarifies that the Guidance provides a framework for
detailed due diligence as a basis for responsible supply chain management of all
minerals.
4 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Contents
Recommendation of the Council on Due Diligence Guidance
for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
What is due diligence in the mineral supply chain
and why is it necessary?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Who should carry out due diligence? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Structure of the Guidance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Nature of the Guidance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Annex I. Five-Step Framework for Risk-Based Due Diligence
in the Mineral Supply Chain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Annex II. Model Supply Chain Policy for a Responsible Global
Supply Chain of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Annex III. Suggested Measures for Risk Mitigation and
Indicators for Measuring Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Supplement on Tin, Tantalum and Tungsten . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Scope and definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Red flags triggering the application of this supplement . . . . . . . . . . . 33
STEP 1: Establish strong company management systems. . . . . . . . . . 36
STEP 2: Identify and assess risks in the supply chain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
STEP 3: Design and implement a strategy to respond
to identified risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
STEP 4: Carry out independent third-party audit
of smelter/refiner’s due diligence practices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
STEP 5: Report annually on supply chain due diligence. . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Appendix. Guiding Note for Upstream Company Risk Assessment . . . 54
Supplement on Gold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Introduction and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Definitions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 5

TABLE OF CONTENTS
STEP 1: Establish strong company management systems. . . . . . . . . . 72
STEP 2: Identify and assess risks in the supply chain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
STEP 3: Design and implement a strategy to respond to identified risks 99
STEP 4: Carry out independent third-party audit of refiner’s due
diligence practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
STEP 5: Report annually on supply chain due diligence. . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Appendix Suggested measures to create economic anddevelopment
opportunities for artisanal and small-scale miners . . . . . . 114
Figure
1. Risks in the supply chain of tin, tantalum and tungsten
from conflict-affected and high-risk areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
2. Risks in the supply chain of gold from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
6 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

RECOMMENDATION OF THE COUNCIL ON DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY…
Recommendation of the Council on Due Diligence
Guidance for Responsible Supply…
Recommendation of the Council on Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply
Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and
1
High-Risk Areas
As amended on 17July2012
THE COUNCIL,
Having regard to Article 5(b) of the Convention on the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development of 14December1960;
Having regard to the Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises which form
part of the Declaration on International Investment and Multinational
Enterprises;
Recalling that the common aim of governments recommending the
observance of the Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the
development community is to promote principles and standards for
responsible business conduct;
Observing that responsible sourcing of minerals has developmental and
business dimensions;
Having regard to the Policy Framework for Investment adopted in2006
which aims to mobilise private investment in a way which supports steady
economic growth and sustainable development;
Recalling the work of the Development Assistance Committee in the field
of international engagement in fragile states, aimed at avoiding harm when
engaging in fragile and conflict-affected environments, including the
1. At the time of adoption, Brazil made the following statement: “In adhering to the
present Recommendation Brazil understands that the Due Diligence Guidance has
been developed on the basis of the experience in the Great Lakes Region in Africa.
Brazil is of the view that companies should take due account of relevant decisions
by the United Nations, including resolutions of the UN Security Council, in
determining if other zones of operation can be considered to be conflict-affected or
high-risk areas.”
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 7

RECOMMENDATION OF THE COUNCIL ON DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY…
Principles for Good International Engagement in Fragile States and Situations
endorsed at its High Level Meeting on 3-4April2007;
Recalling the efforts of the international community to cooperate in the
fight against corruption, including through the OECD Convention on
Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transactions and the United Nations Convention Against Corruption;
Recognising that governments, international organisations and
companies can each draw on their respective competences and roles to
contribute to ensuring that trade and investment in natural resources is
beneficial to society at large;
Considering the efforts of the international community, in particular the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, to combat illegal
exploitation of natural resources in conflict-affected and high-risk areas;
Recognising that there is significant exploitation of natural mineral
resources in conflict-affected and high-risk areas and that companies
sourcing from or directly operating in those areas may face higher risk of
contributing to conflict;
Noting that due diligence for responsible supply chains of minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas is an on-going, proactive and reactive
process through which companies can ensure that they respect human rights
and do not contribute to conflict;
Having regard to the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible
Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
(hereafter “the Guidance”), developed in cooperation with the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and approved by the Investment
Committee and the Development Assistance Committee;
Having regard to the Supplement on Tin, Tantalum and Tungsten and the
Supplement on Gold, which are an integral part of the Guidance, and noting
that supplements on other minerals may be added to the Guidance in the
future;
Noting that this Guidance sets out the steps companies should take to
identify and address actual or potential risks in order to prevent or mitigate
adverse impacts associated with their activities or relationships, while
recognising that flexibility is needed in its application depending on
individual circumstances and factors such as the size of the enterprise, the
location of the activities, the situation in a particular country, the sector and
nature of the products or services involved;
Recognising that the serious abuses associated with the extraction,
transport or trade in minerals listed in Annex II to this Recommendation,
8 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

RECOMMENDATION OF THE COUNCIL ON DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY…
especially when perpetrated against women and children, should not be
tolerated;
On the proposal of the Investment Committee in enlarged session
(including the non-Member adherents to the Declaration on International
Investment and Multinational Enterprises) and the Development Assistance
Committee;
RECOMMENDS that Members and non-Member adherents to the
Declaration on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises
actively promote the observance of the Guidance by companies operating in or
from their territories and sourcing minerals from conflict-affected or high-risk
areas with the aim of ensuring that they respect human rights, avoid
contributing to conflict and successfully contribute to sustainable, equitable
and effective development;
RECOMMENDS, in particular, that Members and non-Member adherents
to the Declaration on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises
take measures to actively support the integration into corporate management
systems of the 5-Step Framework for Risk-Based Due Diligence in the Mineral
Supply Chain having due regard to the Model Supply Chain Policy set out
respectively in Annexes I and II to this Recommendation of which they form
an integral part;
RECOMMENDS that Members and non-Member adherents to the
Declaration on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises, with
the support of the OECD including through its activities with the United
Nations and international development organisations, ensure the widest
possible dissemination of the Guidance and its active use by other
stakeholders including professional associations, financial institutions, and
civil society organisations;
INVITES other non-Members to take due account of and adhere to the
present Recommendation;
INSTRUCTS the Investment Committee and the Development Assistance
Committee to monitor the implementation of the Recommendation and to
report to Council no later than three years following its adoption and as
appropriate thereafter.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 9

OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
© OECD 2016
OECD Due Diligence Guidance
for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas
11

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
Introduction
I
n conflict-affected and high-risk areas, companies involved in mining and
trade in minerals have the potential to generate income, growth and
prosperity, sustain livelihoods and foster local development. In such
situations, companies may also be at risk of contributing to or being
associated with significant adverse impacts, including serious human rights
abuses and conflict.
This Guidance provides a framework for detailed due diligence as a
basis for responsible global supply chain management of minerals.1 The
purpose of this Guidance is to help companies respect human rights and
avoid contributing to conflict through their sourcing decisions, including the
choice of their suppliers. By doing so, this Guidance will help companies
contribute to sustainable development and source responsibly from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas, while creating the enabling conditions
for constructive engagement with suppliers. This Guidance is intended to
serve as a common reference for all suppliers and other stakeholders in the
mineral supply chain and any industry-driven schemes which may be
developed, in order to clarify expectations concerning the nature of
responsible supply chain management of minerals from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas.
This Guidance is the result of a collaborative initiative among governments,
international organisations, industry and civil society to promote accountability
and transparency in the supply chain of minerals from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas.
1. Metals reasonably assumed to be recycled are excluded from the scope of this
Guidance. Recycled metals are reclaimed end-user or post-consumer products, or
scrap processed metals created during product manufacturing. Recycled metal
includes excess, obsolete, defective, and scrap metal materials which contain
refined or processed metals that are appropriate to recycle in the production of tin,
tantalum, tungsten and/or gold. Minerals partially processed, unprocessed or a
bi-product from another ore are not recycled metals.
12 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
Conflict-affected and high-risk areas are identified by the presence of armed
conflict, widespread violence or other risks of harm to people. Armed conflict
may take a variety of forms, such as a conflict of international or
non-international character, which may involve two or more states, or may
consist of wars of liberation, or insurgencies, civil wars, etc. High-risk areas
may include areas of political instability or repression, institutional
weakness, insecurity, collapse of civil infrastructure and widespread
violence. Such areas are often characterised by widespread human rights
abuses and violations of national or international law.
What is due diligence in the mineral supply chain
and why is it necessary?
Due diligence is an on-going, proactive and reactive process through
which companies can ensure that they respect human rights and do not
contribute to conflict.2 Due diligence can also help companies ensure they
observe international law and comply with domestic laws, including those
governing the illicit trade in minerals and United Nations sanctions.
Risk-based due diligence refers to the steps companies should take to identify
and address actual or potential risks in order to prevent or mitigate adverse
impacts associated with their activities or sourcing decisions.
For the purposes of this Guidance, “risks” are defined in relation to the
potentially adverse impacts of a company’s operations, which result from a
company’s own activities or its relationships with third parties, including
suppliers and other entities in the supply chain. Adverse impacts may include
harm to people (i.e.external impacts), or reputational damage or legal liability
for the company (i.e.internal impacts), or both. Such internal and external
impacts are often interdependent, with external harm coupled with
reputational damage or exposure to legal liability.
A company assesses risk by identifying the factual circumstances of its
activities and relationships and evaluating those facts against relevant standards
provided under national and international law, recommendations on responsible
business conduct by international organisations, government-backed tools,
private sector voluntary initiatives and a company’s internal policies and
2. OECD (2011), OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, OECD, Paris; OECD (2006),
OECD Risk Awareness Tool for Multinational Enterprises in Weak Governance Zones, OECD,
Paris; and, Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United
Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework (Report of the Special Represantative of
the Secretary-General on the Issue of Human Rights and Transnational Corporations
and other Business Enterprises, John Ruggie, A/HRC/17/31, 21 March 2011).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 13

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
systems. This approach also helps to scale the due diligence exercise to the size
of the company’s activities or supply chain relationships.
Companies may face risks in their mineral supply chains because of
circumstances of mineral extraction, trade or handling which by their nature
have higher risks of significant adverse impacts, such as financing conflict or
fuelling, facilitating or exacerbating conditions of conflict. In spite of the
fragmented production process in the supply chain, and independent from
their position or leverage over suppliers, companies are not insulated from the
risk of contributing to or being associated with adverse impacts occurring at
various points in the mineral supply chain. Because of this, companies should
take reasonable steps and make good faith efforts to conduct due diligence to
identify and prevent or mitigate any risks of adverse impacts associated with
the conditions of mineral extraction and the relationships of suppliers
operating in conflict-affected or high- risk areas.
The Mineral Supply Chain
The process of bringing a raw mineral to the consumer market involves
multiple actors and generally includes the extraction, transport, handling,
trading, processing, smelting, refining and alloying, manufacturing and sale of
end product. The term supply chain refers to the system of all the activities,
organisations, actors, technology, information, resources and services involved
in moving the mineral from the extraction site downstream to its
incorporation in the final product for end consumers.
In practice, due diligence is structured around the steps that companies
should take to:
identify the factual circumstances involved in the extraction, transport,
handling, trading, processing, smelting, refining and alloying, manufacturing
or selling of products that contain minerals originating from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas;
identify and assess any actual or potential risks by evaluating the factual
circumstances against standards set out in the company’s supply chain
policy (seethe Model Supply Chain Policy, AnnexII);
prevent or mitigate the identified risks by adopting and implementing a risk
management plan. These may result in a decision to continue trade
throughout the course of risk mitigation efforts, temporarily suspend trade
while pursuing ongoing risk mitigation, or disengage with a supplier either
after failed attempts at mitigation or where the company deems mitigation
not feasible or the risks unacceptable.
14 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
Who should carry out due diligence?
This Guidance applies to all companies in the mineral supply chain that
supply or use minerals sourced from conflict-affected or high-risk areas.
While implementation of due diligence should be tailored to particular
company activities and relationships, such as their position in the supply
chain, all companies should conduct due diligence aimed at ensuring that
they do not contribute to human rights abuses or conflict.
This Guidance recognises that due diligence in conflict-affected and high-
risk areas presents practical challenges. Flexibility is needed in the application
of due diligence. The nature and extent of due diligence that is appropriate will
depend on individual circumstances and be affected by factors such as the size
of the enterprise, the location of the activities, the situation in a particular
country, the sector and nature of the products or services involved. These
challenges may be met in a variety of ways, including but not limited to:
Industry-wide cooperation in building capacity to conduct due diligence.
Cost-sharing within industry for specific due diligence tasks.
Participation in initiatives on responsible supply chain management.3
Coordination between industry members who share suppliers.
Cooperation between upstream and downstream companies.
Building partnerships with international and civil society organisations.
Integrating the model supply chain policy (AnnexII) and specific due diligence
recommendations outlined in this Guidance into existing policies and
management systems, due diligence practices of the company, such as
procurement practices, integrity and know your customer due diligence
measures and sustainability, corporate social responsibility or other annual
reporting.
In addition to providing the principles and processes for companies, this
Guidance recommends due diligences processes and procedures that
emerging industry-wide supply chain initiatives should meet as they work
towards conflict-sensitive responsible sourcing practices, and may assist and
complement the development and implementation of comprehensive
certification schemes, such as the International Conference of the Great
Region certification scheme and tools.4
3. For example: ITRI Supply Chain Initiative (iTSCi); Conflict-Free Smelter Program
developed by the Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC) and Global
e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI); Conflict-Free Gold Standard, World Gold Council
(2012); and Chain-of-Custody Certification, Responsible Jewellery Council (2012);
Global Reporting Initiative Supply Chain Working Group (2010).
4. See ICGLR Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
www.icglr.org.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 15

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
Structure of the Guidance
This Guidance provides 1)an overarching due diligence framework for
responsible supply chains of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas (see AnnexI); 2)a model mineral supply chain policy providing a
common set of principles (seeAnnexII); 3)suggested measures for risk
mitigation and indicators for measuring improvement which upstream
companies may consider with the possible support of downstream companies
(seeAnnexIII); and 4)two Supplements on tin-tantalum-tungsten and gold
tailored to the challenges associated with the structure of the supply chain of
these minerals. The Supplements contain specific due diligence
recommendations articulated on the basis of companies’ different positions
and roles in their supply chains. Companies using these minerals, or their
refined metal derivates, should first consult the red flags listed in each
Supplement to determine if the due diligence processes described therein are
applicable.
Nature of the Guidance
This Guidance builds on and is consistent with the principles and
standards contained in the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and
the OECD Risk Awareness Tool for Multinational Enterprises in Weak
Governance Zones. It provides recommendations jointly addressed by
governments to companies operating in or sourcing minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas, providing guidance on principles and
due diligence processes for responsible supply chains of minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas, consistent with applicable laws and
relevant international standards. Observance of this Guidance is voluntary
and not legally enforceable.
16 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
ANNEX I
Five-Step Framework for Risk-Based Due
Diligence in the Mineral Supply Chain
While specific due diligence requirements and processes will differ
depending on the mineral and the position of the company in the supply chain
(as detailed in the mineral Supplements), companies should review their
choice of suppliers and sourcing decisions and integrate into their management
systems the following five-step framework for risk-based due diligence for
responsible supply chains of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas:
1. Establish strong company management systems. Companies should:
A) Adopt, and clearly communicate to suppliers and the public, a company
policy for the supply chain of minerals originating from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas. This policy should incorporate the standards
against which due diligence is to be conducted, consistent with the
standards set forth in the model supply chain policy in AnnexII.
B) Structure internal management to support supply chain due diligence.
C) Establish a system of controls and transparency over the mineral supply
chain. This includes a chain of custody or a traceability system or the
identification of upstream actors in the supply chain. This may be
implemented through participation in industry-driven programs.
D) Strengthen company engagement with suppliers. A supply chain policy
should be incorporated into contracts and/or agreements with suppliers.
Where possible, assist suppliers in building capacities with a view to
improving due diligence performance.
E) Establish a company-level, or industry-wide, grievance mechanism as
an early-warning risk-awareness system.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 17

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
2. Identify and assess risk in the supply chain. Companies should:
A) Identify risks in their supply chain as recommended in the Supplements.
B) Assess risks of adverse impacts in light of the standards of their
supply chain policy consistent with AnnexII and the due diligence
recommendations in this Guidance.
3. Design and implement a strategy to respond to identified risks. Companies
should:
A) Report findings of the supply chain risk assessment to the designated
senior management of the company.
B) Devise and adopt a risk management plan. Devise a strategy for risk
management by either i)continuing trade throughout the course of
measurable risk mitigation efforts; ii)temporarily suspending trade
while pursuing ongoing measurable risk mitigation; or iii)disengaging
with a supplier after failed attempts at mitigation or where a company
deems risk mitigation not feasible or unacceptable. To determine the
correct strategy, companies should review AnnexII (Model Supply Chain
Policy for Responsible Global Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas) and consider their ability to influence, and where
necessary take steps to build leverage, over suppliers who can most
effectively prevent or mitigate the identified risk. If companies pursue
risk mitigation efforts while continuing trade or temporarily suspending
trade, they should consult with suppliers and affected stakeholders,
including local and central government authorities, international or civil
society organisations and affected third parties, where appropriate, and
agree on the strategy for measurable risk mitigation in the risk
management plan. Companies may draw on the suggested measures
and indicators under AnnexIII of the Due Diligence Guidance to design
conflict and high-risk sensitive strategies for mitigation in the risk
management plan and measure progressive improvement.
C) Implement the risk management plan, monitor and track performance
of risk mitigation efforts and report back to designated senior
management. This may be done in cooperation and/or consultation with
local and central government authorities, upstream companies,
international or civil society organisations and affected third-parties
where the risk management plan is implemented and monitored in
conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
D) Undertake additional fact and risk assessments for risks requiring
mitigation, or after a change of circumstances.
18 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
4. Carry out independent third-party audit of supply chain due diligence at
identified points in the supply chain. Companies at identified points (as
indicated in the Supplements) in the supply chain should have their due
diligence practices audited by independent third parties. Such audits may
be verified by an independent institutionalised mechanism.
5. Report on supply chain due diligence. Companies should publicly report on
their supply chain due diligence policies and practices and may do so by
expanding the scope of their sustainability, corporate social responsibility
or annual reports to cover additional information on mineral supply chain
due diligence.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 19

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
ANNEX II
Model Supply Chain Policy for a Responsible
Global Supply Chain of Minerals from
1
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
Recognising that risks of significant adverse impacts which may be
associated with extracting, trading, handling and exporting minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas, and recognising that we have the
responsibility to respect human rights and not contribute to conflict, we
commit to adopt, widely disseminate and incorporate in contracts and/or
agreements with suppliers the following policy on responsible sourcing of
minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas, as representing a
common reference for conflict-sensitive sourcing practices and suppliers’ risk
awareness from the point of extraction until end user. We commit to refraining
from any action which contributes to the financing of conflict and we commit
to comply with relevant United Nations sanctions resolutions or, where
applicable, domestic laws implementing such resolutions.
Regarding serious abuses associated with the extraction,
transport or trade of minerals:
1. While sourcing from, or operating in, conflict-affected and high-risk areas,
we will neither tolerate nor by any means profit from, contribute to, assist
with or facilitate the commission by any party of:
i) any forms of torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment;
ii) any forms of forced or compulsory labour, which means work or service
which is exacted from any person under the menace of penalty and for
which said person has not offered himself voluntarily;
1. This Model Supply Chain Policy for a Responsible Global Supply Chain of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas is intended to provide a common reference for
all actors throughout the entire mineral supply chain. Companies are encouraged
to incorporate the model policy into their existing policies on corporate social
responsibility, sustainability, or other alternative equivalent.
20 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
iii) the worst forms of child labour;2
iv) other gross human rights violations and abuses such as widespread
sexual violence;
v) war crimes or other serious violations of international humanitarian
law, crimes against humanity or genocide.
Regarding risk management of serious abuses:
2. We will immediately suspend or discontinue engagement with upstream
suppliers where we identify a reasonable risk that they are sourcing from, or
linked to, any party committing serious abuses as defined in paragraph 1.
Regarding direct or indirect support to non-state armed groups:33
3. We will not tolerate any direct or indirect support to non-state armed groups
through the extraction, transport, trade, handling or export of minerals. “Direct
or indirect support” to non-state armed groups through the extraction,
transport, trade, handling or export of minerals includes, but is not limited to,
procuring minerals from, making payments to or otherwise providing logistical
assistance or equipment to, non-state armed groups or their affiliates who:4
i) illegally control mine sites or otherwise control transportation routes,
points where minerals are traded and upstream actors in the supply
chain;5 and/or
ii) illegally tax or extort6 money or minerals at points of access to mine sites,
along transportation routes or at points where minerals are traded; and/or
iii) illegally tax or extort intermediaries, export companies or international
traders.
2. See ILO Convention No.182on the Worst Forms of Child Labour (1999).
3. To identify non-state armed groups, companies should refer to relevant UN
Security Council resolutions.
4. “Affiliates” includes négociants, consolidators, intermediaries, and others in the
supply chain that work directly with armed groups to facilitate the extraction,
trade or handling of minerals.
5. “Control” of mines, transportation routes, points where minerals are traded and
upstream actors in the supply chain means i)overseeing extraction, including by
granting access to mine sites and/or coordinating downstream sales to
intermediaries, export companies or international traders; ii)making recourse to
any forms of forced or compulsory labour to mine, transport, trade or sell minerals;
or iii)acting as a director or officer of, or holding beneficial or other ownership
interests in, upstream companies or mines.
6. “Extort” from mines, transportation routes, points where minerals are traded or
upstream companies means the demanding, under the threat of violence or any
other penalty, and for which the person has not voluntarily offered, sums of money
or minerals, often in return for granting access to exploit the mine site, access
transportation routes, or to transport, purchase, or sell minerals.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 21

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
Regarding risk management of direct or indirect support
to non-state armed groups:
4. We will immediately suspend or discontinue engagement with upstream
suppliers where we identify a reasonable risk that they are sourcing from, or
linked to, any party providing direct or indirect support to non-state armed
groups as defined in paragraph 3.
Regarding public or private security forces:
5. We agree to eliminate, in accordance with paragraph 10, direct or indirect
support to public or private security forces who illegally control mine sites,
transportation routes and upstream actors in the supply chain; illegally tax
or extort money or minerals at point of access to mine sites, along
transportation routes or at points where minerals are traded; or illegally tax
or extort intermediaries, export companies or international traders.7
6. We recognise that the role of public or private security forces at the mine
sites and/or surrounding areas and/or along transportation routes should
be solely to maintain the rule of law, including safeguarding human rights,
providing security to mine workers, equipment and facilities, and
protecting the mine site or transportation routes from interference with
legitimate extraction and trade.
7. Where we or any company in our supply chain contract public or private
security forces, we commit to or we will require that such security forces
will be engaged in accordance with the Voluntary Principles on Security and
Human Rights. In particular, we will support or take steps, to adopt
screening policies to ensure that individuals or units of security forces that
are known to have been responsible for gross human rights abuses will not
be hired.
8. We will support efforts, or take steps, to engage with central or local
authorities, international organisations and civil society organisations to
contribute to workable solutions on how transparency, proportionality and
accountability in payments made to public security forces for the provision
of security could be improved.
9. We will support efforts, or take steps, to engage with local authorities,
international organisations and civil society organisations to avoid or
minimise the exposure of vulnerable groups, in particular, artisanal miners
7. “Direct or indirect support” does not refer to legally required forms of support,
including legal taxes, fees, and/or royalties that companies pay to the government
of a country in which they operate (seeparagraph13below on disclosure of such
payments).
22 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
where minerals in the supply chain are extracted through artisanal or
small-scale mining, to adverse impacts associated with the presence of
security forces, public or private, on mine sites.
Regarding risk management of public or private security forces:
10.In accordance with the specific position of the company in the supply
chain, we will immediately devise, adopt and implement a risk
management plan with upstream suppliers and other stakeholders to
prevent or mitigate the risk of direct or indirect support to public or private
security forces, as identified in paragraph 5, where we identify that such a
reasonable risk exists. In such cases, we will suspend or discontinue
engagement with upstream suppliers after failed attempts at mitigation
within six months from the adoption of the risk management plan.8
Where we identify a reasonable risk of activities inconsistent with
paragraphs 8and 9, we will respond in the same vein.
Regarding bribery and fraudulent misrepresentation of the origin
of minerals:
11.We will not offer, promise, give or demand any bribes, and will resist the
solicitation of bribes to conceal or disguise the origin of minerals, to
misrepresent taxes, fees and royalties paid to governments for the
purposes of mineral extraction, trade, handling, transport and export.9
Regarding money laundering:
12.We will support efforts, or take steps, to contribute to the effective
elimination of money laundering where we identify a reasonable risk of
money-laundering resulting from, or connected to, the extraction, trade,
handling, transport or export of minerals derived from the illegal taxation
or extortion of minerals at points of access to mine sites, along
transportation routes or at points where minerals are traded by upstream
suppliers.
8. As detailed in Step 3(D) of AnnexI, companies should conduct an additional risk
assessment on those risks requiring mitigation after the adoption of the risk
management plan. If within six months from the adoption of the risk management
plan there is no significant measurable improvement to prevent or mitigate the
risk of direct or indirect support to public or private security forces, as identified in
paragraph 5, companies should suspend or discontinue engagement with the
supplier for a minimum of three months. Suspension may be accompanied by a
revised risk management plan, stating the performance objectives for progressive
improvement that should be met before resuming the trade relationship.
9. See OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in
International Business Transactions (1997); and the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption (2004).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 23

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
Regarding the payment of taxes, fees and royalties due
to governments:
13.We will ensure that all taxes, fees, and royalties related to mineral
extraction, trade and export from conflict-affected and high-risk areas are
paid to governments and, in accordance with the company’s position in
the supply chain, we commit to disclose such payments in accordance
with the principles set forth under the Extractive Industry Transparency
Initiative (EITI).
Regarding risk management of bribery and fraudulent
misrepresentation of the origin of minerals, money-laundering
and payment of taxes, fees and royalties to governments:
14.In accordance with the specific position of the company in the supply
chain, we commit to engage with suppliers, central or local governmental
authorities, international organisations, civil society and affected third
parties, as appropriate, to improve and track performance with a view to
preventing or mitigating risks of adverse impacts through measureable
steps taken in reasonable timescales. We will suspend or discontinue
engagement with upstream suppliers after failed attempts at mitigation.10
10. As detailed in Step 3(D) of AnnexI, companies should conduct an additional risk
assessment on those risks requiring mitigation after the adoption of the risk
management plan. If within six months from the adoption of the risk
management plan there is no significant measurable improvement to prevent or
mitigate the risks of bribery and fraudulent misrepresentation of the origin of
minerals, money-laundering and payment of taxes, fees and royalties to
governments, companies should suspend or discontinue engagement with the
supplier for a minimum of three months. Suspension may be accompanied by a
revised risk management plan, stating the performance objectives for progressive
improvement that should be met before resuming the trade relationship.
24 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
ANNEX III
Suggested Measures for Risk Mitigation
and Indicators for Measuring Improvement
SUPPLY CHAIN POLICY – SECURITY
AND RELATED ISSUES
RISK MITIGATION:
The following suggested risk mitigation measures may be considered for
implementation by upstream companies individually or through
associations, joint assessment teams or other suitable means to undertake
the following activities:
alert relevant central government authority (e.g.Ministry of Mines) of
abusive and exploitative practices occurring in the supply chain;
in areas in which minerals are illegally taxed or extorted, take immediate
steps to ensure that upstream intermediaries and consolidators disclose
downstream or publicly the payments made to public or private security
forces for the provision of security;
engage with intermediaries and consolidators to help build their
capabilities to document the behaviour of security and payments to
security forces;
while sourcing from areas of artisanal and small-scale mining (“ASM”),
support the formalisation of security arrangements between ASM
communities, local government, and public or private security forces, in
cooperation with civil society and international organisations, as
appropriate, to ensure that all payments are freely made and proportionate
to the service provided, clarify rules of engagement consistent with the
Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights, the UN Code of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the UN Basic Principles on the
Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials;
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 25

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
SUPPLY CHAIN POLICY – SECURITY
AND RELATED ISSUES (cont.)
support the establishment of community forums to share and communicate
information;
support the establishment of a trust or other similar fund, where
appropriate, through which security forces are paid for their services;
build partnership with international organisations or civil society
organisations, as appropriate, to support capacity-building of security
forces consistent with the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human
Rights, on mine sites, and UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials or the UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law
Enforcement Officials.
For further guidance, seeMultilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, The
Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights: An Implementation Toolkit for
Major Sites (2008); International Committee of the Red Cross – Training
Resources for armed police and security personnel; and the International Code
of Conduct for Private Security Service Providers (2010).
RECOMMENDED INDICATORS FOR MEASURING IMPROVEMENT: See, for
example, Global Reporting Initiative, Indicator Protocols Set: Human Rights,
Mining and Metals Sector Supplement (Version3.0), indicator HR8:
“Percentage of security personnel trained in the organisation’s policies or procedures
concerning aspects of human rights that are relevant to operations”. For further
descriptions of indicators, seethe commentaries to the indicator. For
guidance on reporting on indicators and compiling relevant information,
including with regard to risks to communities and women, see Global
Reporting Initiative, Sustainability Reporting Guidelines and GRI Mining and
Metals Sector Supplement (Version3.0).
With regard to minerals originating from mines or transported along
transportation routes where security forces are present, the percentage of
minerals or money, on a disaggregate per batch basis, illegally taxed or extorted from
upstream actors by public or private security forces; the nature and type of payments
to public or private security, including the nature and type of any arrangement on the
provision of security and payment.
26 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
SUPPLY CHAIN POLICY – SECURITY AND EXPOSURE
OF ARTISANAL MINERS TO ADVERSE IMPACTS
RISK MITIGATION:
When sourcing from areas of artisanal mining, the following suggested risk
mitigation measures may be considered for implementation by upstream
companies individually or through associations, joint assessment teams or
other suitable means to undertake the following activities:
minimise the risk of exposure of artisanal miners to abusive practices, by
supporting host countries governments’ efforts for the progressive
professionalization and formalisation of the artisanal sector, through the
establishment of cooperatives, associations or other membership
structures.
For further guidance on how to carry out this risk mitigation, seeResponsible
Jewellery Council, Standards Guidance, “COP 2.14Artisanal and Small-Scale
Mining”, including “supporting the wider community by locally sourcing the
provision of as many goods and services as possible; eliminating child labour
as a condition of engagement in the community; improving women’s
conditions in ASM communities through gender awareness and empowerment
programs.”
RECOMMENDED INDICATORS FOR MEASURING IMPROVEMENT: See, for
example, Global Reporting Initiative, Indicator Protocols Set: Society, Mining
and Metals Sector Supplement (Version3.0), indicator MM8: “Number (and
percentage) of […] operating sites where artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM)
takes place on, or adjacent to, the site; the associated risks and the actions taken to
manage and mitigate these risks”. For further descriptions of indicators, seethe
commentaries to the indicator. For guidance on reporting on indicators and
compiling relevant information, including risks to communities and women,
seeGlobal Reporting Initiative, Sustainability Reporting Guidelines and
Mining and Metals Sector Supplement (Version3.0).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 27

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
SUPPLY CHAIN POLICY – BRIBERY AND FRAUDULENT
MISREPRESENTATION OF MINERALS ORIGIN
RISK MITIGATION:
Upstream companies may cooperate through associations, assessment
teams or other suitable means to build capabilities of suppliers, in particular
SMEs, to conduct due diligence for responsible supply chains of minerals
from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
RECOMMENDED INDICATORS FOR MEASURING IMPROVEMENT: Indicators
for improvement should be based on the processes contained in the
Guidance. For example, indicators may include the information disclosed
downstream; the nature of chain of custody or supply chain transparency systems in
place; the nature and form of supply chain risk assessments and management, in
particular to verify information generated by chain of custody and transparency
systems; the engagement of the company in capability training and/or other industry
initiatives for supply chain due diligence.
SUPPLY CHAIN POLICY – MONEY LAUNDERING
RISK MITIGATION:
The following suggested risk mitigation measures may be considered for
implementation by upstream companies individually or through
associations, joint assessment teams or other suitable means to undertake
the following activities:
develop supplier, customer and transactional red flags to identify suspicious
behaviour and activities;
identify and verify the identity of all suppliers, business partners and
customers;
report suspicious behaviour of criminal activity to local, national, regional and
international law enforcement agencies.
For further guidance, seeFinancial Action Task Force, Guidance on the
risk-based approach to combating money laundering and terrorist financing.
RECOMMENDED INDICATORS FOR MEASURING IMPROVEMENT: Indicators
for improvement should be based on the processes contained in the Guidance.
For example, potential indicators may include the supply chain policy; the
information disclosed downstream, the nature of chain of custody or supply chain
transparency system in place; the nature and form of supply chain risk assessments
and management, in particular to verify information generated by chain of custody
and transparency systems; the engagement of the company in capability training
and/or other industry initiatives for supply chain due diligence.
28 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS
SUPPLY CHAIN POLICY – TRANSPARENCY ON TAXES,
FEES AND ROYALTIES PAID TO GOVERNMENTS
RISK MITIGATION:
The following suggested risk mitigation measures may be considered for
implementation by upstream companies individually or through associations,
assessment teams or other suitable means to undertake the following
activities:
support the implementation of the Extractive Industry Transparency
Initiative;
support the public disclosure, on a disaggregate basis, of all information on
taxes, fees, and royalties that are paid to governments for the purposes of
mineral extraction, trade, and export from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas;
inform relevant local and central governmental agencies of potential
weaknesses in revenue collection and monitoring;
support capability training of these agencies to effectively carry out their
duties.
For a guide on how business can support EITI, seehttp://eiti.org/document/
businessguide.
RECOMMENDED INDICATORS FOR MEASURING IMPROVEMENT: See, for
example, Global Reporting Initiative, Indicator Protocols Set: Economic,
Mining and Metals Sector Supplement (Version3.0), indicator EC1: “Direct
economic value generated and distributed, including revenues, operating costs,
employee compensation, donations and other community investments, retained
earnings, and payments to capital providers and governments”. For further
descriptions of indicators, seethe commentaries to the indicator. For
guidance on reporting on indicators and compiling relevant information,
seeGlobal Reporting Initiative, Sustainability Reporting Guidelines
andMining and Metals Sector Supplement (Version3.0).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 29

OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
© OECD 2016
Supplement on
Tin, Tantalum and Tungsten
31

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
Scope and definitions
This Supplement provides specific guidance on supply chain due
diligence of tin, tantalum and tungsten (hereinafter minerals) from
conflict-affected or high-risk areas according to the different positions in the
mineral supply chain. It distinguishes between the roles of and the
corresponding due diligence recommendations addressed to upstream
companies and downstream companies in the supply chain.
For the purposes of this Supplement, “upstream” means the mineral
supply chain from the mine to smelters/refiners. “Upstream companies”
include miners (artisanal and small-scale or large-scale producers),1 local
traders or exporters from the country of mineral origin, international
concentrate traders, mineral re-processors and smelters/refiners. The OECD
Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas and this Supplement on Tin, Tantalum and
Tungsten (hereafter “Guidance”), recommends, among other things, that
these companies establish a system of internal control over the minerals in
their possession (chain of custody or traceability) and establish on-the-ground
assessment teams, which may be set up jointly through cooperation among
upstream companies while retaining individual responsibility, for generating
and sharing verifiable, reliable, up-to-date information on the qualitative
circumstances of mineral extraction, trade, handling and export from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas. This Guidance calls on these upstream
companies to provide the results of risk assessments to their downstream
purchasers and have the smelters/refiners’ due diligence practices audited
by independent third parties, including through an institutionalised
mechanism.
1. “Upstream companies” includes artisanal or small-scale producing enterprises,
rather than individuals or informal working groups of artisanal miners.
32 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
“Downstream” means the minerals supply chain from smelters/refiners
to retailers. “Downstream companies” include metal traders and exchanges,
component manufacturers, product manufacturers, original equipment
manufacturers (OEMs) and retailers. The Guidance recommends, among other
things, that downstream companies identify, to the best of their efforts, and
review the due diligence process of the smelters/refiners in their supply chain
and assess whether they adhere to due diligence measures put forward in this
Guidance. Downstream companies may participate in industry-wide schemes
that assess smelters/refiners’ compliance with this Guidance and may draw
on the information these schemes provide to help them fulfil the
recommendations in this Guidance.
This distinction reflects the fact that internal control mechanisms based
on tracing minerals in a company’s possession are generally unfeasible after
smelting, with refined metals entering the consumer market as small parts of
various components in end products. By virtue of these practical difficulties,
downstream companies should establish internal controls over their immediate
suppliers and may coordinate efforts through industry-wide initiatives to build
leverage over sub-suppliers, overcome practical challenges and effectively
discharge the due diligence recommendations contained in this Guidance.
Red flags triggering the application of this supplement
This Guidance applies to actors operating in a conflict-affected and
high-risk area, or potentially supplying or using tin (cassiterite), tantalum
(tantalite) or tungsten (wolframite), or their smelted derivates, from a
conflict-affected and high-risk area. Companies should preliminarily review
their mineral or metal sourcing practices to determine if the Guidance applies
to them. The following red flags should trigger the due diligence standards
and processes contained in this Guidance:
Red flag locations of mineral origin and transit:
The minerals originate from or have been transported via a conflict-affected or
high-risk area.2
The minerals are claimed to originate from a country that has limited known
reserves, likely resources or expected production levels of the mineral in
question (i.e. the declared volumes of mineral from that country are out of
keeping with its known reserves or expected production levels).
The minerals are claimed to originate from a country in which minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas are known to transit.
2. See Guidance for definition and indicators of conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 33

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
Supplier red flags:
The company’s suppliers or other known upstream companies have
shareholder or other interests in companies that supply minerals from or
operate in one of the above-mentioned red flag locations of mineral origin and
transit.
The company’s suppliers’ or other known upstream companies are known to
have sourced minerals from a red flag location of mineral origin and transit in
the last 12months.
If a company in the supply chain is unable to determine whether the
minerals in the company’s possession come from a “red flag location of
mineral origin or transit”, it should proceed to Step1of the Guidance.
34 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

35
OECD
DUE
DILIGENCE
GUIDANCE
FOR
RESPONSIBLE
SUPPLY
CHAINS
OF
MINERALS
FROM
CONFLICT-AFFECTED…
©
OECD
2016
SUPPLEMENT
ON
TIN,
TANTALUM
AND
TUNGSTEN
Figure 1. Risks in the supply chain of tin, tantalum and tungsten from conflict-affected and high-risk areas
Risk that Risk that
taxes or Consolidators & Intermediaries taxes or
mineral shares (Situated at the mine site or local markets) mineral shares
are paid to are paid to
Mineral Producers non-state RISK THAT NON-STATE ARMED non-state Local Mineral Exporters
Artisanal & small-scale mining (ASM) armed groups ! armed groups
or large-scale mining (LSM) fo o r r c s e e s c a u l r o it n y g - G Ille R g O al U ly P ta S x , O e R xt o S r E t o C r U co R n I t T ro Y l FORCES: fo o r r c s e e s c a u l r o it n y g ! RISK THAT NON-STATE ARMED
trade routes trade routes GROUPS OR SECURITY FORCES:
RISK THAT NON-STATE ARMED intermediaries.
! -Sell minerals to intermediaries. -Illegally tax or extort exporters.
GROUPS OR SECURITY FORCES:
-Transport minerals for intermediaries. -Control exporters through ownership
-Physically control the mines. rights or other means.
-Use forced or compulsory labour to ASSMM MMMMMMIIIINNNNNNEEEERRRAAALS ADDITIONAL ! ! -Sell minerals to exporters.
mine. RISKS: -Transport minerals for exporters.
-Illegally tax or extort money or
- G m e in t e lo r g a i l s s t i f c ro a m l a m ss i i n s e ta rs n . c e or ADDIT I R O I N S A K L S : ! !
equipment from producers. clandestine
-Commit serious abuses: LSM MINERALS m in in to e r n a e ls ig s h m bo u u g r g in le g d
Forced or compulsory labour. countries
Worst forms of child labour.
Torture, cruel, inhuman or International Concentrate
degrading treatment. Mineral Traders
! ! Sexual violence. Refiners/Smelters & ! !
Serious violations of international Mineral Risk that taxes or
humanitarian law. Re-processors mineral shares are paid
to non-state armed
groups or security
forces along trade routes
Metal Component Original Equipment
Traders ! & ! Manufacturers
& Product & Retailers !
Exchanges Manufacturers
LEGEND
-Risk of direct or indirect support to non-state armed groups through the -Risk of non-existent or inadequate due diligence for a
! = extraction, transport, trade, handling or export of minerals. ! = responsible supply chain of minerals from conflict-affected
-Risk that public security forces are present for purposes other than and high-risk areas (as recommended in this guidance).
providing security.
-Risk related to contracting of security forces, public or private.
-Risk of bribery to conceal or disguise the illicit origin of minerals, to misrepresent taxes, fees and royalties paid to governments for the purposes of ! = mineral extraction, trade, handling, transport and export.
-Risk of fraudulently misrepresented information on mineral origin, transportation routes, chain of custody and the circumstances of
mineral extraction, trade, handling, transport and export.

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
STEP 1: ESTABLISH STRONG COMPANY
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
OBJECTIVE: To ensure that existing due diligence and management systems
within companies address risks associated with minerals from conflict
affected or high-risk areas.
A. Adopt and commit to a supply chain policy for minerals
originating from conflict-affected and high-risk areas. This policy,
for all companies in the supply chain, should include:
1. A policy commitment setting forth principles for common reference on
mineral extraction, transport, handling, trading, processing, smelting,
refining and alloying, and export, against which the company will assess
itself and the activities and relationships of suppliers. This policy should be
consistent with the standards set forth in the model supply chain policy in
AnnexII.
2. A clear and coherent management process to ensure risks are adequately
managed. The company should commit to the due diligence steps and
recommendations outlined for the various levels identified in this
Guidance.
B. Structure internal management systems to support supply
chain due diligence. Companies in the supply chain should:
1. Assign authority and responsibility to senior staff with the necessary
competence, knowledge and experience to overseethe supply chain due
diligence process.
2. Ensure availability of resources necessary to support the operation and
monitoring of these processes.3
3. Put in place an organisational structure and communication processes that
will ensure critical information, including the company policy, reaches
relevant employees and suppliers.
4. Ensure internal accountability with respect to the implementation of the
supply chain due diligence process.
3. Art.4.1 (d), ISO 9001:2008.
36 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
C. Establish a system of controls and transparency
over the mineral supply chain.
C.1. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For local mineral exporters
1. Collect4 and disclose the following information to immediate downstream
purchasers, who will then pass them down the supply chain, and to any
institutionalised mechanism, regional or global, once in place with the
mandate to collect and process information on minerals from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas:
a) all taxes, fees or royalties paid to government for the purposes of
extraction, trade, transport and export of minerals;
b) any other payments made to governmental officials for the purposes of
extraction, trade, transport and export of minerals;
c) all taxes and any other payments made to public or private security
forces or other armed groups at all points in the supply chain from
extraction onwards;
d) the ownership (including beneficial ownership) and corporate structure
of the exporter, including the names of corporate officers and directors;
the business, government, political or military affiliations of the
company and officers;
e) the mine of mineral origin;
f) quantity, dates and method of extraction (artisanal and small-scale or
large-scale mining);
g) locations where minerals are consolidated, traded, processed or
upgraded;
h) the identification of all upstream intermediaries, consolidators or other
actors in the upstream supply chain;
i) transportation routes.
4. Due diligence is an on-going, proactive and reactive process, and therefore
information may be collected and progressively built with the quality
progressively improved through various steps in the Guidance, including through
supplier communication [such as through contractual provisions or other
processes described in Step 1(C) and Step 1(D)], through established chain of
custody or transparency systems [see Step 1(C.4)], and through risk assessments
[seeStep 2(I) and Appendix: Guiding Note for Upstream Company Risk
Assessment].
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 37

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
C.2.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For international concentrate
traders and mineral re-processors:
1. Incorporate the above disclosure requirements into commercial contracts
with local exporters.5
2. Collect and disclose the following information to immediate downstream
purchasers and to any institutionalised mechanism, regional or global, once
in place with the mandate to collect and process information on minerals
from conflict-affected and high-risk areas:
a) all export, import and re-export documentation, including records of all
payments given for the purposes of export, import and re-export and all
taxes and any other payments made to public or private security forces
or other armed groups;
b) the identification of all immediate suppliers (local exporters);
c) all information provided by local exporter.
C.3.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For smelters/refiners:
1. Incorporate the above disclosure requirements into commercial contracts with
international concentrate traders, mineral re-processors and local exporters.6
2. Maintain the information generated by the chain of custody and/or
traceability system outlined below for a minimum of five years,7 preferably
on a computerised database and make it available to downstream
purchasers and to any institutionalised mechanism, regional or global, once
in place with the mandate to collect and process information on minerals
from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
C.4.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For all upstream companies:
1. Introduce a chain of custody and/or traceability system that generates the
following information on a disaggregated basis for the minerals from a “red
flag location of mineral origin and transit”, preferably supported by
documentation: mine of mineral origin; quantity and dates of extraction;
locations where minerals are consolidated, traded or processed; all taxes,
fees, royalties or other payments made to governmental officials for the
purposes of extraction, trade, transport and export of minerals; all taxes
5. It is the responsibility of the international concentrate trader to gain and maintain
the information requested from local exporters regardless of whether exporters
comply with the recommendations above.
6. It is the responsibility of the smelter/refiner to gain and maintain the information
requested from international concentrate traders and local exporters regardless of
whether they comply with the recommendations above.
7. See FATF Recommendation10. Also seeAnnexII, Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme and Kimberley Process Moscow Declaration.
38 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
and other payments made to public or private security forces or other
armed groups; identification of all actors in the upstream supply chain;
transportation routes.8
2. Make all information gained and maintained pursuant to the due diligence
standards and processes contained in this Guidance available to downstream
purchasers and auditors and to any institutionalised mechanism, regional or
global, once in place with the mandate to collect and process information on
minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
3. Avoid, where practicable, cash purchases and ensure that all unavoidable
cash purchases of minerals are supported by verifiable documentation and
preferably routed through official banking channels.9
4. Support the implementation of the principles and criteria set forth under
the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI).10
C.5.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For all downstream companies:
1. Introduce a supply chain transparency system that allows the identification of
the smelters/refiners in the company’s mineral supply chain through which
the following information on the supply chain of minerals from “red flag
locations of mineral origin and transit” should be obtained: the identification
of all countries of origin, transport and transit for the minerals in the supply
chains of each smelter/refiner. Companies which, due to their size or other
factors, may find it difficult to identify actors upstream from their direct
suppliers may engage and actively cooperate with industry members with
whom they share suppliers or downstream companies with whom they have a
business relationship to identify which smelters are in the supply chain.
2. Maintain related records for a minimum of five years, preferably on a
computerised database.
3. Support extending digital information-sharing systems on suppliers11 to
include smelters/refiners, and adapt systems to assess supplier due diligence
in the supply chain of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas,
8. See ITRI Supply Chain Initiative (iTSCi).
9. Financial institutions are encouraged to refer to this Guidance and supplement
when undertaking customer due diligence for the purposes of providing their
services and factor their compliance with this Guidance into their decision-making.
10. For information on the EITI, seehttp://eiti.org/. For a guide on how business can
support EITI, seehttp://eiti.org/document/businessguide.
11. For example, seedigital supplier information systems such as E.TASC.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 39

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
utilizing the criteria and process recommended in this Guidance, with due
regard to business confidentiality and other competitive concerns.12
D. Strengthen company engagement with suppliers. Companies
in the supply chain should ensure that suppliers commit to a supply chain
policy consistent with AnnexII and the due diligence processes in this
Guidance. In order to do this, the company should:
1. Establish, where practicable, long-term relationships with suppliers as opposed
to short-term or one-off contracts in order to build leverage over suppliers.
2. Communicate to suppliers their expectations on responsible supply chains
of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas, and incorporate the
supply chain policy and due diligence processes set out in this Guidance
into commercial contracts and/or written agreements with suppliers which
can be applied and monitored,13 including, if deemed necessary, the right to
conduct unannounced spot-checks on suppliers and have access to their
documentation.
3. Consider ways to support and build capabilities of suppliers to improve
performance and conform to company supply chain policy.14
4. Commit to designing measurable improvement plans with suppliers with
the involvement, if relevant and where appropriate, of local and central
governments, international organisations and civil society when pursuing
risk mitigation.15
E. Establish a company level grievance mechanism. Depending on
their position in the supply chain companies may:
1. Develop a mechanism allowing any interested party (affected persons or
whistle-blowers) to voice concerns regarding the circumstances of mineral
extraction, trade, handling and export in a conflict-affected and high-risk
area. This will allow a company to be alerted of risks in its supply chain as
to the problems in addition to the company fact and risk assessments.
2. Provide such a mechanism directly, or through collaborative arrangements
with other companies or organisations, or by facilitating recourse to an
external expert or body (i.e. ombudsman).
12. Business confidentiality and other competitive concerns means price information
and supplier relationships without prejudice to subsequent evolving
interpretation. All information will be disclosed to any institutionalised
mechanism, regional or global, once in place with the mandate to collect and
process information on minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
13. See Steps 2-5 for information on monitoring suppliers and managing non-compliance.
14. See Step 3, “Risk Mitigation”.
15. See Step 3, “Risk Mitigation”.
40 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
STEP 2: IDENTIFY AND ASSESS RISKS IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN
OBJECTIVE: To identify and assess risks on the circumstances of extraction,
trading, handling and export of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas.
I. UPSTREAM COMPANIES
Upstream companies are expected to clarify chain of custody and the
circumstances of mineral extraction, trade, handling and export and identify
and assess risk by evaluating those circumstances against the model supply
chain policy on minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas in
AnnexII. Upstream companies may cooperate to carry out the recommendations in
this section through joint initiatives. However, companies retain individual
responsibility for their due diligence, and should ensure that all joint work duly takes
into consideration circumstances specific to the individual company.
A. Identify the scope of the risk assessment of the mineral
supply chain. Smelters/refiners, international concentrate traders and
mineral re-processors should review information generated in Step 1in
order to target risk assessments on those minerals and suppliers triggered
by the “red flag locations of mineral origin and transit” and “supplier red
flags”, as listed in the introduction.
B. Map the factual circumstances of the company’s supply
chain(s), under way and planned. Upstream companies should
assess the context of conflict-affected and high-risk areas; clarify the chain
of custody, the activities and relationships of all upstream suppliers; and
identify the locations and qualitative conditions of the extraction, trade,
handling and export of the mineral. Upstream companies should rely on
information collected and maintained through Step1, and should gain and
maintain up-to-date on-the-ground information in order to map the
supply chain and assess risk effectively. See Appendix: Guiding Note for
Upstream Company Risk Assessments, which contains guidance on
establishing on-the-ground assessment teams (hereafter “assessment
teams”) and includes a recommended list of questions for consideration.
Assessment teams may be established jointly by upstream companies
operating or supplying from conflict affected or high-risk areas. Upstream
companies will remain individually responsible for following any of the
recommendations put forward by assessment teams and acting on them.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 41

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
C. Assess risks in the supply chain. The company should assess the
factual circumstances of the supply chain against the model supply chain
policy on a qualitative basis to determine risks in the supply chain:
1. Review applicable standards, including:
a) The principles and standards of the company supply chain policy,
consistent with AnnexII.16
b) National laws of the countries where the company is domiciled or
publicly-traded (if applicable); of the countries from which the minerals
are likely to originate; and of transit or re-export countries.
c) Legal instruments governing company operations and business relations,
such as financing agreements, contractor agreements, and supplier
agreements.
d) Other relevant international instruments, such as the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises, international human rights and humanitarian
law.
2. Determine whether the circumstances in the supply chain (in particular,
the answers to the recommended guiding questions outlined in the
Appendix) meet the relevant standards. Any reasonable inconsistency
between a factual circumstance and a standard should be considered a risk
with potential adverse impacts.
II. DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES
Downstream companies should identify the risks in their supply chain by
assessing the due diligence practices of their smelters/refiners against this
Guidance. Downstream companies who may find it difficult to identify actors
upstream from their direct suppliers (due to their size or other factors), may
engage and actively cooperate with other industry members with whom they
share suppliers or downstream companies with whom they have a business
relationship to carry out the recommendation in this section in order to
identify the smelters/refiners in their supply chain and assess their due
diligence practices or identify through industry validation schemes the
refiners/ smelters that meet the requirements of this Guidance in order to
source therefrom.17 Downstream companies retain individual responsibility
for their due diligence, and should ensure that all joint work duly takes into
consideration circumstances specific to the individual company.
16. See Step 1 (A) above and AnnexII.
17. See the Conflict-Free Smelter Program, www.conflictfreesourcing.org.
42 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
A. Identify, to the best of their efforts, the smelters/refiners in their
supply chain. Downstream companies should aim to identify the
mineral smelters/refiners that produce the refined metals used in their
supply chain. This may be carried out through confidential discussions
with the companies’ immediate suppliers, through the incorporation of
confidential supplier disclosure requirements into supplier contracts, by
specifying to direct suppliers the smelters/refiners that meet the
requirements of this Guidance, by using confidential information-sharing
systems on suppliers and/or through industry wide schemes to disclose
upstream actors in the supply chain.18
B. Identify the scope of the risk assessment of the mineral supply
chain. After identifying the smelters/refiners that produce the refined
metal used in their supply chain, downstream companies should engage
with those smelters/refiners in their supply chains and obtain from them
initial information on country of mineral origin, transit and transportation
routes used between mine and smelters/refiners. Downstream companies
should review this information and any information generated in Step 1in
order to target risk assessments on those minerals and suppliers triggered
by the “red flag locations of mineral origin and transit” and “supplier red
flags”, as listed in the introduction.
C. Assess whether the smelters/refiners have carried out all
elements of due diligence for responsible supply chains of
minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
1. Gain evidence on due diligence practices of the smelter/refiner.
2. Review the information generated by the assessment team.19
3. Cross-check evidence of due diligence practices of the smelter/refiner against
the supply chain policy and due diligence processes contained in this
Guidance.
4. Work with the smelter/refiner and contribute to finding ways to build capacity,
mitigate risk and improve due diligence performance, including through
industry-wide initiatives.
D. Where necessary, carry out, including through participation
in industry-driven programs, joint spot checks at the mineral
smelter/refiner’s own facilities.
18. See Step 1(C) (“Establish internal controls over the mineral supply chain”) and
Step1 (D) above.
19. See Appendix: Guiding Note for Upstream Company Risk Assessment.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 43

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
STEP 3: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT A STRATEGY
TO RESPOND TO IDENTIFIED RISKS
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and respond to identified risks in order to prevent or
mitigate adverse impacts. Companies may cooperate to carry out the
recommendations in this section through joint initiatives. However, companies
retain individual responsibility for their due diligence, and should ensure that
all joint work duly takes into consideration circumstances specific to the
individual company.
A. Report findings to designated senior management, outlining
the information gathered and the actual and potential risks identified in
the supply chain risk assessment.
B. Devise and adopt a risk management plan. Companies should
adopt a supply chain risk management plan that outlines the company
responses to risks identified in Step 2. Companies may manage risk by
either i) continuing trade throughout the course of measurable risk
mitigation efforts; ii) temporarily suspending trade while pursuing ongoing
measurable risk mitigation; or iii) disengaging with a supplier in cases
where mitigation appears not feasible or unacceptable. To adopt the risk
management plan and determine the correct risk management strategy,
companies should:
1. Review the model supply chain policy on minerals from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas in AnnexII or their own internal policy if consistent with
AnnexII to determine whether the identified risks can be mitigated by
continuing, suspending or terminating the relationship with suppliers.
2. Manage risks that do not require termination of the relationship with a supplier
through measurable risk mitigation. Measurable risk mitigation should aim
to promote progressive performance improvement within reasonable
timescales. In devising a strategy for risk mitigation, companies should:
a) Consider, and where necessary take steps to build leverage over
upstream suppliers who can most effectively prevent or mitigate the
identified risk:
i) UPSTREAM COMPANIES – Depending on their position in the
supply chain, upstream companies have significant actual or
potential leverage over the actors in the supply chain who can
most effectively and most directly mitigate the substantive risks
of adverse impacts. If upstream companies decide to pursue risk
mitigation while continuing trade or temporarily suspending
trade, mitigation efforts should focus on finding ways to
44 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
constructively engage, as appropriate, with relevant stakeholders
with a view to progressively eliminating the adverse impacts
within reasonable timescales.20
ii) DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES – Depending on their position in the
supply chain, downstream companies are encouraged to build and/
or exercise their leverage over upstream suppliers who can most
effectively and most directly mitigate the risks of adverse impacts.
Should downstream companies decide to pursue risk mitigation
while continuing trade or temporarily suspending trade, their
mitigation efforts should focus on suppliers’ value orientation and
capability-training to enable them to conduct and improve due
diligence performance. Companies should encourage their industry
membership organisations to develop and implement due diligence
capability-training modules in cooperation with relevant
international organisations, NGOs, stakeholders and other experts.
b) Consult with suppliers and affected stakeholders and agree on the
strategy for measurable risk mitigation in the risk management plan.
Measurable risk mitigation should be adjusted to the company’s
specific suppliers and the contexts of their operations, state clear
performance objectives within a reasonable timeframe and include
qualitative and/or quantitative indicators to measure improvement.
i) UPSTREAM COMPANIES – Publish the supply chain risk
assessment and the supply chain management plan, with due
regard to business confidentiality and other competitive
concerns,21 and make them available to local and central
authorities, upstream companies, local civil society and affected
third parties. Companies should ensure sufficient time for
affected stakeholders to review the risk assessment and
management plan and respond to and take due account of
questions, concerns and alternative suggestions for risk
management.
20. Companies should refer to AnnexII for the recommended risk management
strategy. AnnexIII includes suggested measures for risk mitigation and some
recommended indicators to measure improvement. More detailed guidance on risk
mitigation is expected to come from the implementation phase of the Guidance.
21. See footnote 12.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 45

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
C. Implement the risk management plan, monitor and track
performance of risk mitigation, report back to designated
senior management and consider suspending or discontinuing
engagement with a supplier after failed attempts at mitigation.
1. UPSTREAM COMPANIES – Upstream companies should implement, monitor
and track performance of risk mitigation in cooperation and/or consultation
with local and central authorities, upstream companies, international or civil
society organisations and affected third parties. Upstream companies may
wish to establish or support the creation of community-monitoring networks
to monitor or track performance of risk mitigation.
D. Undertake additional fact and risk assessments for risks
requiring mitigation, or after a change of circumstances.22 Supply
chain due diligence is a dynamic process and requires on-going risk
monitoring. After implementing a risk mitigation strategy, companies should
repeat Step 2to ensure effective management of risk. Additionally, any
change in the company’s supply chain may require some steps to be repeated
in order to prevent or mitigate adverse impacts.
22. A change of circumstances should be determined on a risk-sensitive basis through
on-going monitoring of the companies’ chain of custody documentation and the
contexts of the conflict-affected areas of mineral origin and transport. Such
change of circumstances may include a change of supplier or actor in the chain of
custody, place of origin, transportation routes or point of export. It may also
include factors specific to the context, such as an increase in conflict in specific
areas, changes in military personnel overseeing an area and ownership or control
changes in the mine of origin.
46 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
STEP 4: CARRY OUT INDEPENDENT THIRD-PARTY AUDIT
OF SMELTER/REFINER’S DUE DILIGENCE PRACTICES
OBJECTIVE: To carry out an independent third-party audit of the smelter/
refiner’s due diligence for responsible supply chains of minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas and contribute to the improvement of
smelter/refiner and upstream due diligence practices, including through any
institutionalised mechanism to be established at the industry’s initiative,
supported by governments and in cooperation with relevant stakeholders.
A. Plan an independent third party audit of the smelter/refiner’s
due diligence for responsible supply chains of minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas. The audit should include the
following audit scope, criteria, principles and activities:23
1. The scope of the audit: The audit scope will include all activities, processes
and systems used by the smelter/refiner to conduct supply chain due
diligence of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas. This
includes, but is not limited to, smelter/refiner controls over the mineral
supply chain, the information disclosed to downstream companies on
suppliers, chain of custody and other mineral information, smelter/refiner
risk assessments including the on-the-ground research, and smelter/refiner
strategies for risk management.
2. The audit criteria: The audit should determine the conformity of the
smelter/refiner due diligence process against the standards and processes
of this due diligence Guidance.
3. The audit principles:
a) Independence: To preserve neutrality and impartiality of audits, the audit
organisation and all audit team members (“auditors”) must be independent
from the smelter/refiner as well as from smelter/refiner’s subsidiaries,
licensees, contractors, suppliers and companies cooperating in the joint
audit. This means, in particular, that auditors must not have conflicts of
interests with the auditee including business or financial relationship
with the auditee (in the form of equity holdings, debt, securities), nor
have provided any other services for the auditee company, particularly
23. This recommendation outlines some basic principles, scope, criteria and other
basic information for consideration for companies to commission a supply
chain-specific independent third-party audit of the due diligence practices of
smelters/refiners. Companies should consult ISO International Standard19011:
2002 (“ISO19011”) for detailed requirements on audit programmes (including
programme responsibilities, procedures, record-keeping, monitoring and
reviewing) and a step-by-step overview of audit activities.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 47

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
any services relating to the due diligence practice or the supply chain
operations assessed therein, within a 24month period prior to the
audit.24
b) Competence: Auditors should conform to the requirements set out in
Chapter 7of ISO19011on Competence and Evaluation of Auditors.
Specifically, auditors must have knowledge and skills in the following
areas:25
i) Auditing principles, procedures and techniques (ISO19011).
ii) The supply chain due diligence principles, procedures and techniques of
the company.
iii) The organisational structure of the company’s operations, particularly
the company’s mineral procurement and mineral supply chain.
iv) The social, cultural and historical contexts of the conflict-affected
areas of mineral origin or transport, including relevant linguistic
abilities and culturally appropriate sensitivities for conducting audits.
v) All applicable standards, including the model supply chain policy on
minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas (AnnexII).
c) Accountability: Performance indicators may be used to monitor the
ability of the auditors to carry out the audit in conformity with the audit
programme, based on the objectives, scope and criteria of the audit,
judged against audit programme records.26
4. The audit activities:
a) Audit preparation: The objectives, scope, language and criteria for the
audit should be clearly communicated to the auditors with any
ambiguities clarified between the auditee and auditors before the
initiation of the audit.27 The auditors should determine the feasibility of
the audit based on the availability of time, resources, information and
cooperation of relevant parties.28
b) Document review: Samples of all documentation produced as part of the
smelter/refiner’s supply chain due diligence for minerals from conflict
affected areas should be reviewed “to determine the conformity of the
system, as documented, with audit criteria.”29 This includes, but is not
24. See Chapter VIII (A) of FLA Charter.
25. The requisite knowledge and skill can be determined by the auditor’s education
and work experience, as laid out in Chapter7.4of ISO19011:2002. Auditors must
also exhibit personal attributes of professionalism, impartiality, and honesty.
26. See Chapter5.6of ISO19011.
27. See Chapter6.2of ISO19011.
28. Ibid.
29. See 6.3of IS019011.
48 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
limited to, documentation on supply chain internal controls (a sample of
chain of custody documentation, payment records), relevant
communications and contractual provisions with suppliers, documentation
generated by company risk assessments (including all records on business
partners and suppliers, interviews and on-the-ground assessments), and
any documents on risk management strategies (e.g.agreements with
suppliers on improvement indicators).
c) In-site investigations: Before beginning the in-site investigations,
auditors should prepare an audit plan,30 and all working documents.31
The evidence from smelter/refiner supply chain risk assessments and
smelter/refiner supply chain risk management should be verified.
Auditors should gather further evidence and verify information by
conducting relevant interviews, making observations and reviewing
documents.32 In-site investigations should include:
i) The smelter/refiner facilities and sites where the smelter/refiner
carry out due diligence for responsible supply chains of minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
ii) A sample of the smelter/refiner’s suppliers (both international
concentrate traders, re-processors and local exporters), which includes
supplier facilities.
iii) A meeting with the assessment team (seeAppendix) to review the
standards and methods for generating verifiable, reliable and
up-to-date information, and audit a sample of evidence relied upon by
the smelter/refiner while carrying out due diligence for responsible
supply chains of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
In preparation for the meeting, auditors should request information
and submit questions to the on-the-ground assessment team.
iv) Consultations with local and central governmental authorities,
UNexpert groups, UN peacekeeping missions and local civil society.
d) Audit Conclusions: Auditors should generate findings that determine,
based on the evidence gathered, the conformity of the smelter/refiner
due diligence for responsible supply chains of minerals from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas with this Guidance. Auditors should
make recommendations in the audit report for the smelter/refiner to
improve their due diligence practices.
30. See 6.4.1of ISO19011.
31. See 6.4.3of ISO19011.
32. Art. 6.5.4of ISO19011.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 49

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
B. Implement the audit in accordance with the audit scope,
criteria, principles and activities set out above.
1. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AUDIT. Under current circumstances, all actors
in the supply chain should cooperate through their industry organisations
to ensure that the auditing is carried out in accordance with audit scope,
criteria, principles and activities listed above.
a) SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For local mineral exporters
i) Allow access to company sites and all documentation and records of
supply chain due diligence.
ii) Facilitate safe access to on-the-ground assessment team. Coordinate
logistics to provide a safe meeting point for audit teams and the
on-the-ground assessment team.
b) SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For international concentrate traders and
mineral re-processors
i) Allow access to company sites and all documentation and records of
supply chain due diligence.
c) SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For smelters/refiners
i) Allow access to company sites and all documentation and records of
supply chain due diligence.
ii) Facilitate contact with the sample of suppliers selected by the audit
team.
d) SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For all downstream companies
i) It is recommended that all downstream companies participate and
contribute through industry organisations or other suitable means to
appoint auditors and define the terms of the audit in line with the
standards and processes set out in this Guidance. Small and medium
enterprises are encouraged to join or build partnerships with such
industry organisations.
2. INSTITUTIONALISED MECHANISM FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF
MINERALS FROM CONFLICT AFFECTED AND HIGH-RISK AREAS. All actors
in the supply chain, in cooperation and with the support of governments
and civil society, may consider incorporating the audit scope, criteria,
principles and activities set out above into an institutionalised mechanism
that would overseeand support the implementation of due diligence for
responsible supply chains of minerals from conflict-affected and high- risk
areas. The institution should carry out the following activities:
a) With regard to audits:
i) Accrediting auditors;
ii) Overseeing and verifying audits;
50 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
iii) Publishing audit reports with due regard to business confidentiality
and competitive concerns.33
b) Develop and implement modules to build capabilities of suppliers to
conduct due diligence and for suppliers to mitigate risk.
c) Receive and follow-up on grievances of interested parties with the
relevant company.
33. See footnote 12.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 51

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
STEP 5: REPORT ANNUALLY ON SUPPLY CHAIN DUE
DILIGENCE
OBJECTIVE: To publicly report on due diligence for responsible supply chains
of minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas in order to generate
public confidence in the measures companies are taking.
A. Annually report or integrate, where practicable, into annual
sustainability or corporate responsibility reports, additional
information on due diligence for responsible supply chains of
minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
A.1.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For all upstream companies
1. Company Management Systems: Set out the company’s supply chain due
diligence policy; explain the management structure responsible for the
company’s due diligence and who in the company is directly responsible;
describe the control systems over the mineral supply chain put in place by
the company, explaining how this operates and what data it has yielded
that has strengthened the company’s due diligence efforts in the reporting
period covered; describe the company’s database and record-keeping
system and explain the methods for disclosing all suppliers, down to the
mine of origin, to downstream actors; disclose information on payments
made to governments in line with EITI criteria and principles.
2. Company risk assessment in the supply chain: Publish the risk assessment with
due regard taken of business confidentiality and other competitive
concerns.34 Outline the methodology, practices and information yielded by
the on-the-ground assessment; explain the methodology of company
supply chain risk assessments.
3. Risk management: Describe the steps taken to manage risks, including a
summary report on the strategy for risk mitigation in the risk management
plan, and capability-training, if any, and the involvement of affected
stakeholders. Disclose the efforts made by the company to monitor and
track performance.
34. Business confidentiality and other competitive concerns means price information
and supplier relationships without prejudice to subsequent evolving
interpretation. All information will be disclosed to any institutionalised
mechanism, regional or global, once in place with the mandate to collect and
process information on minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
52 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
A.2.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For smelters/refiners
1. Audits: Publish the audit reports of smelters/refiners with due regard taken
of business confidentiality and other competitive concerns.35
A.3.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For all downstream companies
1. Company Management Systems: Set out the company’s supply chain due
diligence policy; explain the management structure responsible for the
company’s due diligence and who in the company is directly responsible.
2. Risk assessment and management: Describe the steps taken to identify
smelters/refiners in the supply chain and assess their due diligence
practices, including the published list of qualified smelters/refiners through
industry validation schemes conforming to the due diligence processes
recommended in this Guidance. Describe the steps taken to manage risks.
3. Audits: Publish the audit reports of their due diligence practices, with due
regard taken of business confidentiality and other competitive concerns36
and responses to identified risks.
35. See footnote 34.
36. See footnote 34.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 53

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
APPENDIX
Guiding Note for Upstream Company
Risk Assessment
A. Create enabling conditions for an effective risk assessment.
When planning and structuring the supply chain risk assessment,
upstream companies in the supply chain should take into account the
following recommended actions:
1. Use an evidence-based approach. Conclusions of the company risk
assessment should be corroborated by verifiable, reliable, up-to-date
evidence, which should be gained through on-the-ground research carried
out by an on-the ground assessment team.
2. Preserve the reliability and quality of company fact and risk assessment of a
supply chain, by ensuring that company assessors are independent from the
activity being assessed and free from conflict of interests.37 Company
assessors must commit to reporting truthfully and accurately and
upholding the highest professional ethical standards and exercise “due
professional care”.38
3. Ensure the appropriate level of competence, by employing experts with
knowledge and skill in as many of the following areas: the operational
contexts assessed (e.g.linguistic abilities, cultural sensitivities), the
substance of conflict-related risks (e.g.the standards in AnnexII, human
rights, international humanitarian law, corruption, financial crime, conflict
and financing parties to a conflict, transparency), the nature and form of
the mineral supply chain (e.g.mineral procurement), and the standards and
process contained in this due diligence Guidance.
B. Establish an on-the-ground assessment team (hereafter
“assessment team”) in the conflict-affected and high-risk
37. Art. 4, ISO19011:2002
38. Art. 4, ISO19011:2002
54 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
areas of mineral origin and transit to generate and maintain
information on suppliers and the circumstances of mineral
extraction, trade, handling and export. Upstream companies may
establish such a team jointly in cooperation with other upstream companies
supplying from, or operating in these areas (“cooperating companies”).
1. Upstream companies establishing the assessment team should:
a) Ensure the assessment team consults with local and central governments
to gain information, with a view to strengthening cooperation and
opening avenues of communication between government institutions,
civil society and local suppliers.
b) Ensure the assessment team regularly consults with local civil society
organisations with local knowledge and expertise.
c) Establish or support the creation, where appropriate, of community-
monitoring networks to feed information into the assessment team.
d) Share information gained and maintained by the assessment team
throughout the entire supply chain, preferably through a computerized
system with web accessibility for companies in the supply chain and any
institutionalised mechanism, regional or global, once in place with the
mandate to collect and process information on minerals from conflict-
affected and high-risk areas.
2. Upstream companies establishing the assessment team should define the
scope and capacities of the on-the-ground assessment team to undertake
the following activities:
a) Obtain first-hand evidence of the factual circumstances of mineral
extraction, trade, handling and export. This includes:
i) The militarisation of mine sites, transportation routes and points
where minerals are traded. The assessment team should track the
militarisation of mine sites, transportation routes and points where
minerals are traded. Interactive maps which indicate the location of
mines, armed groups, trade routes, roadblocks and airfields can
constitute an additional source of information for companies.39
Tracking the militarisation of mines, transportation routes and points
where minerals are traded means identifying factual circumstances
resulting in direct or indirect support to non-state armed groups and
public or private security forces (as defined in the model supply chain
policy in AnnexII).
ii) Serious abuses associated with the extraction, transport or trade of
minerals (as defined in the model supply chain policy in AnnexII)
39. Such as DRC Map, US Department of State Map, IPIS map.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 55

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
committed by public or private security forces, non-state armed
groups or other third parties operating in mining areas, along
transportation routes or points where minerals are traded.
b) Respond to specific questions or requests for clarifications made by
cooperating companies and put forward recommendations for the
company risk assessment and risk management. All cooperating
companies may put forward questions to, or request clarifications from,
the on-the-ground assessment team on the following:40
i) Evidence generated by the traceability and chain of custody system
[Step 1 (C)] and the risk assessment [Step 2].
ii)Information on suppliers (intermediaries and exporters) in line with
“Know your customer/supplier” protocols, such as those implemented
through anti-money laundering compliance systems.41
c) Receive and assess grievances voiced by interested parties on the ground
and communicate to cooperating companies.
B.1.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For local exporters
1. Facilitate local logistics for the assessment team, responding to any requests
for assistance.
2. Facilitate assessment team’s access to all upstream intermediaries,
consolidators and transporters.
3. Allow the assessment team access to all company sites, including in
neighbouring countries or other countries where trans-shipment or relabeling
is likely, as well as all books, records or other evidence of procurement
practices, tax, fee and royalty payments, and export documentation.
4. Allow the assessment team access to all information gained and maintained
as part of the company’s due diligence practices, including payments made
to non-state armed groups and public or private security forces.
5. Identify relevant personnel to act as contact points for the assessment
team.
40. Questions and clarifications should be recorded and feed into information
systems for future use, monitoring and updating, jointly accessible by cooperating
companies.
41. See, Financial Action Task Force, Guidance on the risk-based approach to
combating money laundering and terrorist financing, June2007, Section3.10.
56 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
B.2.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For international concentrate
traders and mineral re-processors
1. Facilitate assessment team’s access to all cross-border transporters, allowing
them to join cross-border transportation of minerals on an unannounced
basis.
2. Allow assessment teams access to all sites owned by the international
concentrate traders and mineral re-processors in neighbouring countries or
other countries where trans-shipment or relabeling is likely for minerals
from conflict-affected and high-risk areas or where leakages in the supply
chain are known or likely to exist.
3. Allow assessment team access to all books, records or other evidence of
procurement practices, tax, fee and royalty payments, and export
documentation.
4. Allow the assessment team access to all information gained and maintained
as part of the company’s due diligence practices, including payments made to
non-state armed groups and public or private security forces.
5. Proactively provide assessment team with records of minerals from other
red flag locations of mineral origin and transit.
6. Identify relevant personnel to act as contact points for the assessment team.
B.3.SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For smelters/refiners
1. Identify relevant personnel to act as contact points for the assessment
team.
2. Allow assessment team access to all books, records or other evidence of
procurement practices, tax, fee and royalty payments, and export
documentation.
3. Allow the assessment team access to all information gained and maintained
as part of the company’s due diligence practices.
C. RECOMMENDED QUESTIONS THAT COMPANY ASSESSMENTS
SHOULD ANSWER: These questions relate to common circumstances
found in the supply chain of tin, tantalum, tungsten, their ores and metal
derivates which give rise to risks.
1. Know the context of the conflict-affected and high-risk area of mineral
origin, transit and/or export
a) Study profiles on the conflict-affected and high-risk areas of origin,
neighbouring and transit countries (including potential transportation
routes and the locations of extraction, trade, handling, and export).
Relevant information will include public reports (from governments,
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 57

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
international organisations, NGOs, and media), maps, UN reports and UN
Security Council sanctions, industry literature relating to mineral
extraction, and its impact on conflict, human rights or environmental
harm in the country of potential origin, or other public statements
(e.g.from ethical pension funds).
b) Are there international entities capable of intervention and investigation,
such as UN peacekeeping units, based in or near the area? Can these
systems be used to identify actors in the supply chain? Are there local
means for recourse to address concerns related to the presence of armed
groups or other elements of conflict? Are relevant national, provincial,
and/or local regulatory agencies with jurisdiction over mining issues
capable of addressing such concerns?
2. Know your suppliers and business partners42
a) Who are the suppliers or other parties involved in financing, extracting,
trading and transporting the minerals between point of extraction and
the point at which the company undertaking the due diligence takes
custody of the minerals? Identify all significant actors in the supply
chain, collecting information on ownership (including beneficial
ownership), corporate structure, the names of corporate officers and
directors, the ownership interests of the company or officers in other
organisations, the business, government, political or military affiliations
of the company and officers (in particular, focusing on potential
relationships with non-state armed groups or public or private security
forces).43
b) What procurement and due diligence systems do these suppliers have in
place? What supply chain policies have suppliers adopted and how have
they integrated them into their management processes? How do they
establish internal controls over minerals? How do they enforce policies
and conditions on their suppliers?
3. Know the conditions of mineral extraction in conflict affected and
high-risk areas
a) What is the exact origin of the minerals (what are the specific mines)?
b) What was the method of extraction? Identify if minerals were extracted
through artisanal and small-scale mining (“ASM”) or large-scale mining,
42. See Financial Action Task Force, Guidance on the risk-based approach to
combating money laundering and terrorist financing, June2007, Section3.10. See
Step2.
43. See Chapter VI of Guidelines on reputational due diligence, International Association
of Oil andGas Producers (Report No. 356, 2004). See also Chapter 5 “Knowing
Clients and Business Partners” of the OECD Risk Awareness Tool for Multinational
Enterprises in Weak Governance Zones, 2006.
58 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
and if through ASM, identify, where possible, whether extracted by
individual artisanal miners, artisanal mining cooperatives, associations,
or small enterprises. Identify the taxes, royalties and fees paid to
government institutions, and the disclosures made on those payments.
c) Do conditions of extraction involve the presence and involvement of
non-state armed groups or public or private security forces, including in one
or more of the following: direct control of the mine or transportation routes
around mine; levying of taxes on miners or extortion of minerals; beneficial
or other ownership interests in the mine site or mineral rights by non-state
armed groups or public or private security forces and/or their families and/
or associates; engagement in mining as a second income when “off duty”;
or provision of security paid by miners or through taxes arising from
production. Do any of these armed groups or military units have an
involvement or interest in the conflict? Do any of them have a history of
involvement in widespread human rights abuses or other crimes?
d) What are the conditions of extraction? In particular, identify if there are
i)any forms of torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment exacted
for the purposes of mineral extraction; ii)any forms of forced or
compulsory labour which means work or service which is exacted from
any person under the menace of penalty and for which said person has
not offered himself voluntarily; iii)the worst forms of child labour for the
purposes of mineral extraction; iv)other gross human rights violations
and abuses such as widespread sexual violence on mine sites or in the
course of mineral extraction; or v)war crimes or other serious violations
of international humanitarian law, crimes against humanity or genocide.
4. Know the conditions of mineral transport, handling and trade in conflict
affected and high-risk areas
a) Were downstream purchasers situated at the mine site or elsewhere?
Were the minerals from different miners handled and processed separately
and kept separate when sold downstream? If not, at what point were the
minerals processed, consolidated and mixed when sold downstream?
b) Who were the intermediaries that handled the minerals? Identify
whether any of those intermediaries have been reported or suspected to
be extracting or trading minerals associated with non-state armed
groups.
c) To what extent, if any, are public or private security forcesor non-state
armed groups directly or indirectly involved in the trading, transportation
or taxing of the minerals? Are the public or private security forces or
non-state armed groups benefiting in any way from the trading,
transportating or taxing of minerals being carried out by other parties,
including through affiliations with intermediaries or exporters?
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 59

SUPPLEMENT ON TIN, TANTALUM AND TUNGSTEN
d) To what extent, if any, are the public or private security forces or
non-state armed groups present along trade and transportation routes?
Are there any human rights abuses occurring in trading, transportation
or taxing of the minerals? For example, is there evidence of forced labour,
extortion or coercion being used? Is child labour being used? In
particular, identify if there are i)any forms of torture, cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment exacted for the purposes of mineral transport
or trade; ii)any forms of forced or compulsory labour to mine, transport,
trade or sell minerals; iii)the worst forms of child labour for the purposes
of mineral transport or trade; iv)other gross human rights violations and
abuses such as widespread sexual violence on mine sites or in the course
of mineral transport or trade; or v)war crimes or other serious violations
of international humanitarian law, crimes against humanity or genocide
for the purposes of mineral transport or trade.
e) What information is available to verify the downstream trade, such as
authentic documents, transportation routes, licensing, cross-border
transportation, and the presence of armed groups and/or public or
private security forces?
5. Know the conditions of export from conflict affected and high-risk areas
a) What was the point of export and have there been reports or are there
suspicions of facilitation payments or other bribes paid at points of export
to conceal or fraudulently misrepresent the mineral origin? What
documents accompanied mineral export and have there been reports or
are there suspicions of fraudulent documentation or inaccurately
described declarations (on type of mineral, mineral quality, origin,
weight, etc.)? What taxes, duties or other fees were paid on export and
have there been reports or are there suspicions of under-declaration?
b) How was export transportation coordinated and how was it carried out?
Who are the transporters and have there been reports or are there
suspicions of their engagement in corruption (facilitation payment,
bribes, under-declarations, etc.)? How was export financing and
insurance obtained?
60 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
© OECD 2016
Supplement on Gold
61

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
Introduction and scope
This Supplement on Gold forms an integral part of the OECD Due Diligence
Guidance for Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas. The Introductory
section of the Guidance as well as Annex I (Five-Step Framework for Risk-Based
Due Diligence in the Mineral Supply Chain), Annex II (Model Supply Chain Policy for
a Responsible Global Supply Chain of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk
Areas) and Annex III (Suggested Measures for Risk Mitigation and Indicators for
Measuring Improvement) applies to the Supplement on Gold. Therefore the term
“Guidance” may be used throughout this Supplement to refer to both this
Supplement on Gold as well as the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas.
This Supplement provides specific guidance on supply chain due
diligence of gold from conflict-affected and high-risk areas according to the
different positions of companies in the gold supply chain. It distinguishes
between the roles of and the corresponding due diligence recommendations
addressed to upstream companies and downstream companies in the supply chain
(seeDefinitions), and includes, where necessary, specific recommendations to
the specific actors within those two broad categories. Companies falling into
these categories should carry out due diligence regardless of whether they
own, lease or loan the gold.
This Supplement focuses on the steps companies should take to avoid
contributing to conflict and serious abuses of human rights in the supply
chain of gold potentially sourced from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
This Supplement includes due diligence measures to be taken on recycled/
scrap or previously refined gold (“Recyclable Gold”) only insofar as recycled
material is a potential means of laundering gold that has been mined in
conflict-affected and high-risk areas in order to hide its origin. Gold
investment products (ingots, bars, coins, and grain in sealed containers) held
in bullion bank vaults, central bank vaults, exchanges and refineries with a
“verifiable date”1 prior to 1January2012 will not require information on their
origin (“Grandfathered Stocks”). However, gold investment products will
require “Know Your Counterparty” due diligence to ensure the trade in
Grandfathered stocks is not carried out in violation of international sanctions
1. “Verifiable date” is date which can be verified through inspection of physical date
stamps on products as well as inventory lists. See definitions.
62 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
or does not enable money-laundering resulting from, or connected to, the sale
of gold reserves in conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
In order to determine the applicability of this Supplement, all companies
in the gold supply chain should carry out Step 1 (Establish strong company
management systems) and begin Step 2 (Identify and assess risks in the
supply chain) to determine whether they actually or potentially source gold
from conflict-affected and high-risk areas. The remainder of the Steps in this
Supplement will then only apply to companies sourcing gold from conflict-
affected and high-risk areas and actors in the gold supply chain that operate
in a conflict-affected or high-risk area.
In addition to providing the principles, standards and processes for the
performance of due diligence by individual companies, the Guidance and this
Supplement recommends due diligence principles, standards and processes
that emerging industry-wide supply chain initiatives should meet as they work
towards conflict-sensitive responsible sourcing practices. The development of
comprehensive certification schemes, such as the International Conference of
the Great Lakes Region certification scheme and tools, or other industry or
multi-stakeholder initiatives that provide for verification processes of conflict-
free gold sourcing practices consistent with the standards and processes
contained in this Guidance may deliver credible assurance that a supply chain
does not contribute to conflict or serious human rights abuses.2
This Guidance recognises that due diligence in conflict-affected and
high- risk areas presents practical challenges. Flexibility is needed in the
application of due diligence. The nature and extent of due diligence that is
appropriate will depend on individual circumstances and be affected by
factors such as the size of the enterprise, the location of the activities, the
situation in a particular country, the sector and nature of the products or
services involved. These challenges may be met in a variety of ways, including
but not limited to:
Industry-wide cooperation in building capacity to conduct due diligence.
Cost-sharing within industry for specific due diligence tasks.
Participation in initiatives on responsible supply chain management.3
2. See definition of contributing to conflict in Annex II of OECD Guidance.
3. For example provided they are consistent with the OECD Guidance: Conflict-Free
Smelter Program; Conflict Free Gold Standard, World GoldCouncil (2012); Responsible
Gold Guidance, London Bullion Market Association(2012); and Chain-of-Custody
Certification, Responsible Jewellery Council(2012); Fairtrade and Fairmined Standard
for Gold from Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining, Alliance of Responsible Mining/
Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International (2010).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 63

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
Coordination between industry members who share suppliers.
Cooperation between upstream and downstream companies.
Building partnerships with international and civil society organisations.
Integrating the model supply chain policy (Annex II) and specific due
diligence recommendations outlined in this Guidance into existing policies
and management systems, due diligence practices of the company, such as
procurement practices, integrity and know your customer due diligence
measures and sustainability, corporate social responsibility or other annual
reporting.
The Guidance in particular recognises that due diligence regarding
artisanal and small-scale gold mining in conflict-affected and high-risk areas
presents challenges. Artisanal and small-scale gold producers such as
individuals, informal working groups or communities are not expected to
carry out due diligence as recommended in this Guidance, but they are
encouraged to remain involved in due diligence efforts of their customers and
formalise so they can carry out due diligence in the future. Only artisanal and
small-scale enterprises are expected to carry out due diligence (seeDefinitions).
Suggested measures are contained in the Appendix to prevent potentially
harmful social and economic impacts on vulnerable groups4 in conflict-
affected and high-risk areas, including legitimate artisanal and small-scale
miners.
Given the complex operating environments of conflict-affected and high-
risk areas, where conditions can evolve and degenerate rapidly, due diligence
is understood as an on-going proactive and reactive process whereby
companies take reasonable steps and make good faith efforts to identify and
respond to risks of contributing to conflict and serious abuses in accordance
with this Guidance, and in particular Annex II. This Guidance promotes
progressive improvement to due diligence practices through constructive
engagement with suppliers.Companies are encouraged tointegrate this
Guidance into theirbroader policies and practices on responsible business
conduct, and are encouraged to informconsumers and the public at large that
they are implementing this Guidance. Companies may use this Guidance to
4. See OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (2011), Commentary on Chapter
IV Human Rights, paragraph 40: “[…] enterprises should respect the human rights
of individuals belonging to specific groups or populations that require particular
attention, where they may have adverse human rights impacts on them. In this
connection, United Nations instruments have elaborated further on the rights of
indigenous peoples; persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities; women; children; persons with disabilities; and migrant
workers and their families.”
64 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
make reasonable determinationsas tothe responsible conflict-sensitive
nature of their products.
This Guidance builds on and is consistent with the principles and
standards contained in the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and
the OECD Risk Awareness Tool for Multinational Enterprises in Weak
Governance Zones. It provides recommendations jointly addressed by
governments to companies operating in or sourcing minerals from conflict-
affected and high-risk areas, providing guidance on principles and due
diligence processes for responsible supply chains of minerals from conflict-
affected and high-risk areas, consistent with applicable laws and relevant
internationally recognised standards. As such,this Guidanceis not a
substitute for nor should it be considered to override domestic laws and
regulations, including those relating to mining.5
Definitions
Artisanal and Small-scale Mining (ASM) – formal or informal mining
operations with predominantly simplified forms of exploration, extraction,
processing, and transportation. ASM is normally low capital intensive and
uses high labour intensive technology. “ASM” can include men and women
working on an individual basis as well as those working in family groups, in
partnership, or as members of cooperatives or other types of legal associations
and enterprises involving hundreds or even thousands of miners. For
example, it is common for work groups of 4-10individuals, sometimes in
family units, to share tasks at one single point of mineral extraction (e.g.
excavating one tunnel). At the organisational level, groups of 30-300miners
are common, extracting jointly one mineral deposit (e.g. working in different
tunnels), and sometimes sharing processing facilities.6
ASM Enterprises – Artisanal and small-scale entities that are sufficiently
formalised and structured to carry out this Guidance. As per the Appendix, all
artisanal and small-scale miners are encouraged to formalise in this regard.
Bullion – The generic word for refined gold in bar or ingot form.
Bullion bank – A bank (including retail, commercial and investment
banks) or financial institution such as a trading house, that conducts financial
transactions in refined gold.
Chain of custody – A record of the sequence of entities which have
custody of minerals as they move through a supply chain.
5. See Chapter I, paragraph 2, OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (2011).
6. See Felix Hruschka and Cristina Echavarría, Rock-Solid Chances for Responsible
Artisanal Mining, Alliance for Responsible Mining Series on Responsible ASM
No.3, 2011.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 65

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
Conflict-affected and high-risk areas – Areas identified by the presence of
armed conflict, widespread violence, including violence generated by criminal
networks, or other risks of serious and widespread harm to people. Armed
conflict may take a variety of forms, such as a conflict of international or non-
international character, which may involve two or more states, or may consist of
wars of liberation, or insurgencies, civil wars. High-risk areas are those where there
is a high risk of conflict or of widespread or serious abuses as defined in
paragraph 1of Annex II of the Guidance. Such areas are often characterised
bypolitical instability or repression, institutional weakness, insecurity, collapse of
civil infrastructure, widespread violenceand violations of national or
international law.
“Direct or indirect support” to non-state armed groups or public or
private security forces through the extraction, transport, trade, handling or
export of gold includes, but is not limited to, procuring minerals from, making
payments to or otherwise providing logistical assistance or equipment to,
non-state armed groups or their affiliates who:7
i) illegally control mine sites or otherwise control transportation routes, points
where gold is traded and upstream actors in the supply chain;8 and/or
ii) illegally tax or extort9 money or gold at points of access to mine sites, along
transportation routes or at points where gold is traded; and/or
iii) illegally tax or extort intermediaries, export companies or international
traders.
Due diligence – Due diligence is an on-going, proactive and reactive
process through which companies can identify, prevent, mitigate and account
for how they address their actual and potential adverse impacts as an integral
part of business decision-making and risk management systems. Due
diligence can help companies ensure they observe the principles of
7. “Affiliates” includes négociants, consolidators, intermediaries, and others in the
supply chain that work directly with armed groups to facilitate the extraction,
trade or handling of gold.
8. “Control” of mines, transportation routes, points where gold is traded and
upstream actors in the supply chain means i) overseeing extraction, including by
granting access to mine sites and/or coordinating downstream sales to
intermediaries, export companies or international traders; ii)making recourse to
any forms of forced or compulsory labour to mine, transport, trade or sell gold; or
iii)acting as a director or officer of, or holding beneficial or other ownership
interests in, upstream companies or mines.
9. “Extort” from mines, transportation routes, points where gold is traded or
upstream companies means the demanding, under the threat of violence or any
other penalty, and for which the person has not voluntarily offered, sums of
money or gold, often in return for granting access to exploit the mine site, access
transportation routes, or to transport, purchase, or sell gold.
66 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
GOLD SOURCES
For the purpose of this Guidance, there are three possible sources of gold and
gold-bearing material, for which different due diligence is recommended:
1) MINED GOLD – Gold that originates from mines (medium and large-scale or
artisanal and/or small-scale mines) and has never been previously refined. The
origin of Mined Gold is the mine where it was extracted. Sub-categories of mined
gold before it is refined are:
Alluvial gold – Newly mined gold that has been taken from sand and gravel
deposits, most often in or near streams, typically as very small but visible pieces
of gold. Alluvial gold is usually in the form of “dust,” occasionally nuggets, which
is already concentrated in form, easily transported, and may be easily melted
and/or semi-refined into small ingots (normally of 85% – 92 % purity). Alluvial
gold in all of these forms requires refining before use as bullion or jewellery, but
can ordinarily be directly refined, without further intermediate concentration or
processing.
Gold ore – Rock or gravel that contains an economically valuable concentration of
gold. This concentration may be very small by weight, e.g., 1gram of gold per
tonne of ore, and still be economically recoverable in medium and large-scale
industrial mining. Gold ore, because of its bulk and weight, is ordinarily not
transported far from a mine site for processing.
Gold concentrate – An intermediate material produced from processing of gold
ore to achieve a higher concentration, but still requiring further intermediate
processing to produce doré. A gold concentrate would ordinarily be transported to
a nearby gold smelter for creation of doré.
Gold doré – A bar of newly mined gold metal alloy, generally originating from
extensive processing of ores and smelting at medium and large-scale mines to a
high concentration (normally of 85% – 90% purity). Mined gold in this form is not
commercial quality and must then be transported to a refinery to be directly
refined, without further intermediate processing.
Mining Byproduct – Gold that is produced from other metal mining, e.g., from
copper sulphide ore, in which gold may be a trace constituent. When gold is a
byproduct, the other more important metal is processed and refined first, and the
gold is then extracted and refined from the final residue of the first metal, such
as a copper electrolytic cell slime.
LSM Gold – Gold that has been produced by Medium and Large-scale Mining
(seeDefinition of Medium and Large-scale Mining).
ASM Gold – Gold that has been produced by Artisanal and Small-scale Mining
(seeDefinition of Artisanal and Small-scale Mining).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 67

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
GOLD SOURCES (cont.)
2) RECYCLABLE GOLD – Gold that has been previously refined, such as end-user,
post-consumer and investment gold and gold-bearing products, and scrap and waste
metals and materials arising during refining and product manufacturing, which is
returned to a refiner or other downstream intermediate processor to begin a new life
cycle as ’recycled gold’. The origin of Recyclable Gold is considered to be the point in the
gold supply chain where the gold is returned to the refiner or other downstream
intermediate processor or recycler. Sub-categories of recyclable gold are:
Unprocessed recyclable gold – Recyclable Gold still in its original form and/or
fabrication scrap, before it has been returned for processing and refining (e.g. bullion
bars, pieces of jewellery, ornaments, coins, machine turnings, etc.)
Melted recyclable gold – Recyclable Gold which has been melted as the first recycling
process and cast into rudimentary bars or some other form with undefined
dimensions and variable fineness.
Industrial By-product – A material produced while processing another material, not
the primary intended product but nevertheless a separate useful material. For
example, gold refining often creates low value by-products such as furnace flue dust,
spent crucibles and floor sweepings.
3) GRANDFATHERED STOCKS – Gold investment products (ingots, bars, coins, and
grain in sealed containers) held in bullion bank vaults, central bank vaults, exchanges
and refineries with a verifiable date prior to 1January2012, which will not require a
determination of origin. This includes stocks held by a third party on behalf of the listed
entities.
Verifiable Date: A date which can be verified through inspection of physical date
stamps on products and/or inventory lists.
Mixed Gold – Gold that includes multiple sources (e.g., both mined gold and recyclable
gold). Due diligence should be conducted on those sources of mixed gold in accordance
with the recommendations in this Supplement
international law and comply with domestic laws, including those governing
the illicit trade in minerals and United Nations sanctions.
Good Delivery – A standard of physical specifications for refined gold and
for capabilities of gold refiners that is accepted on an exchange or in an over-
the-counter (“OTC”) market (e.g. London Good Delivery).
Industry Programme – For the purpose of this Guidance, this term means
an initiative or programme created and managed by an industry organisation
or similar industry initiative to support and advance some or all of the
recommendations of this Guidance. An Industry Programme may be a part of
the organisation’s broader activities that encompass other goals. Any
reference in this Guidance to relevant activities and/or initiatives of an
68 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
Industry Programme is understood to mean that such activities and/or
initiatives will be consistent with this Guidance.
Institutionalised Mechanism – For the purpose of this Guidance, this
term means an organisation created by and composed of representatives of
governments, industries and civil society with a mandate to support and
advance some or all of the recommendations of this Guidance. Any reference
in this Guidance to relevant activities and/or initiatives of an Institutionalised
Mechanism is understood to mean that such activities and/or initiatives will
be consistent with this Guidance.
Legitimate artisanal and small-scale mining: The legitimacy of artisanal
and small-scale mining is a difficult concept to define because it involves a
number of situation-specific factors (seeAppendix). For the purposes of this
Guidance, legitimate refers, among others, to artisanal and small-scalemining
that is consistent with applicable laws.10 When the applicable legal framework
is not enforced, or in the absence of such a framework, the assessment of the
legitimacy of artisanal and small-scale mining will take into account the good
faith efforts ofartisanal and small-scale miners and enterprises to operate
within the applicable legal framework (where it exists) as well as their
engagement in opportunities for formalisation as they become available
(bearing in mind that in most cases, artisanal and small-scale miners have
very limited or no capacity, technical ability or sufficient financial resources to
do so). In either case, Artisanal and small-scale mining, as with all mining,
cannot be considered legitimate when it contributes toconflict and serious
abuses associated with the extraction, transport or trade of minerals as
defined in Annex II of the Guidance.
Management system – Management processes and documentation that
collectively provide a systematic framework for ensuring that tasks are
performed correctly, consistently and effectively to achieve the desired
outcomes, and that provide for continual improvement in performance.
Medium and Large-Scale Mining (LSM) – For the purposes of this
Guidance, LSM refers to gold mining operations that are not considered to be
artisanal or small-scale mining.
Recycler – an individual or entity that is not a refiner as defined below,
that collects, consolidates and/or processes recyclable/scrap gold, such as
sampling and assay, prior to refining to begin a new life cycle.
10. See Vision for Responsible Artisanal and Small-scale Mining in Alliance for Responsible
Mining (Echavarria, C. et. al. Eds.), (2008)The Golden Vein – A guide to responsible
artisanal and small-scale mining. ARM Series on Responsible ASM No. 1. Medellin.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 69

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
Refiner – an individual or entity that purifies gold to a commercial market
quality, by removing other substances from doré, alluvial gold, recyclable/
scrap or other gold-bearing feedstocks.
Suppliers – This term refers to any individual or organisation who is
considered to be a participant in the supply chain for the supply of gold and
gold-bearing materials.
Supply chain – The term supply chain refers to the system of all the
activities, organisations, actors, technology, information, resources and
services involved in moving gold from the source to end consumers.
Upstream supply chain and Upstream Companies – “Upstream supply
chain” means the gold supply chain from the mine to refiners. “Upstream
companies” include miners (artisanal and small-scale enterprises or
medium and large-scale gold mining companies),11 local gold traders or
exporters from the country of gold origin, transporters, international gold
traders of Mined/Recyclable Gold and refiners. Artisanal and small-scale
gold producers such as individuals, informal working groups or
communities are not expected included as upstream companies for the
purposes of carrying out due diligence in line with this Guidance,
although they are encouraged to remain involved in due diligence efforts
of their customers and formalise so they can carry out due diligence in
the future.
Downstreamsupply chain and Downstream Companies – “Downstream
supply chain” means the gold supply chain from refiners to retailers.
“Downstream companies” include refined gold traders and gold markets,
bullion banks and exchanges or other entities that do their own gold
vaulting, jewellery manufacturers and retailers, and other companies
using gold in the fabrication of products (e.g. manufacturers and retailers
of electronics or medical devices).
Supply Chain Due Diligence: With specific regard to supply chain due
diligence for responsible mineral sourcing, risk-based due diligence refers to
the steps companies should take to identify, prevent and mitigate actual and
potential adverse impacts and ensure that they respect human rights and do
not contribute to conflict12 through their activities in the supply chain.13
11. For the avoidance of doubt, these guidelines include miners, processors and
refiners which may be owned or otherwise controlled or directed by governments
or other State entities.
12. As defined in Annex II of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance.
13. OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (OECD, 2011); OECD Risk Awareness
Tool for Multinational Enterprises in Weak Governance Zones, (OECD, 2006);
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United
Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework, 21March2011 (A/HRC/17/31).
70 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

71
OECD
DUE
DILIGENCE
GUIDANCE
FOR
RESPONSIBLE
SUPPLY
CHAINS
OF
MINERALS
FROM
CONFLICT-AFFECTED…
©
OECD
2016
SUPPLEMENT
ON
GOLD
Figure 2. Risks in the supply chain of gold from conflict-affected and high-risk areas

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
STEP 1: ESTABLISH STRONG COMPANY MANAGEMENT
SYSTEMS
OBJECTIVE: To ensure that existing due diligence and management systems of
companies in the gold supply chain are structured for effective due diligence.
SECTION I – GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ALL COMPANIES
IN THE GOLD SUPPLY CHAIN
A. Adopt and commit to a supply chain policy for identifying and
managing risks for gold potentially from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas. This policy, for all companies in the supply chain,
should include:
1. A policy commitment setting forth common principles and standards for
responsible supply chains of gold from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas, against which the company will assess itself and the activities and
relationships of suppliers. This policy should be consistent with the
standards set forth in the model supply chain policy in Annex II of the
Guidance.
2. A clear and coherent management process to ensure risks are adequately
managed. The company should commit to the due diligence steps and
recommendations outlined for the various levels identified in this
Supplement.
B. Structure internal management systems to support supply
chain due diligence. Companies in the supply chain should:
1. Assign authority and responsibility to senior staff with the necessary
competence, knowledge and experience to overseethe supply chain due
diligence process.
2. Ensure availability of resources necessary to support the operation and
monitoring of these processes.
3. Put in place an organisational structure and communication processes that
will ensure critical information, including the company policy, reaches
relevant employees and suppliers. Training as appropriate should be carried
out, and companies may consider training modules developed by Industry
Programmes or Institutionalised Mechanisms.
4. Ensure internal accountability with respect to the implementation of the
supply chain due diligence process.
72 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
C. Establish a system of transparency, information collection and
control over the gold supply chain.
1. Create internal documentation and records of supply chain due diligence
processes, findings and resulting decisions. This will include Step 1due
diligence, as well as additional due diligence that may be carried out with
regard to gold supply chains from conflict-affected and high-risk areas
(Steps2-5).
2. Maintain internal inventory and transaction documentation that can be
retrieved and used to retrospectively identify gold inputs and outputs and/
or support a chain-of-custody system (seeStep3(B)). This should include:
a) Information regarding the form, type and physical description of gold
and gold-bearing materials, e.g. gold ore, gold concentrate, gold doré,
alluvial gold, recyclable gold, gold bullion, jewellery manufacturing
inputs and/or products, electronic components and gold plating
solutions, etc. (see“Definitions” section of this Supplement).
b) Information provided by the supplier regarding the weight and assay of
gold and gold-bearing materials of input, and determinations of the
weight and assay of gold inputs and outputs.
c) Supplier details, including “know your counterparty” (“KYC”) due
diligence information consistent with the 40Recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF).14
d) Unique reference numbers for each input and output.
e) Dates of input and output, purchases and sales.
3. Make and receive payments for gold through official banking channels
where they are reasonably available. Avoid cash purchases where possible,
and ensure that all unavoidable cash purchases are supported by verifiable
documentation.
4. Cooperate fully and transparently with law enforcement agencies regarding
gold transactions. Provide customs officials with access to complete
information regarding all shipments that cross international borders, or to
which they otherwise have jurisdiction.
5. Maintain the information collected above for a minimum of five years,
preferably on a computerised database.
D. Strengthen company engagement with suppliers. Companies
in the supply chain should seek to influence their suppliers to commit to a
14. See Financial Acton Task Force (FATF) 40Recommendations (2003). See also
Financial Action Task Force, RBA Guidance for Dealers in Precious Metal and Stones
(2008).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 73

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
supply chain policy consistent with Annex II and the due diligence
processes in this Guidance. In order to do this, the company should:
1. Aim to establish long-term relationships with suppliers in order to build
responsible sourcing relationships with them.
2. Communicate to suppliers the expectations on due diligence for
responsible supply chains of gold from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas, consistent with Annex II of the Guidance and this Supplement. In
particular, companies should communicate their expectation that their
suppliers should determine a risk management strategy with respect to
identified risks in the supply chain, consistent with Annex II of the
Guidance.
3. Incorporate the supply chain policy set out in this Guidance into
commercial contracts and/or written agreements with suppliers which can
be applied and monitored.15
4. Consider ways to support and build capabilities of suppliers to improve
performance and conform to company supply chain policy.16
5. Commit to risk management, which may include designing measurable
improvement plans with suppliers with the involvement, if relevant and
where appropriate, of local and central governments, international
organisations and civil society when pursuing risk mitigation.17
E. Establish a company and/or mine level grievance mechanism.
Depending on their position in the supply chain companies should:
1. Develop an early warning risk awareness mechanism allowing any
interested party (affected persons or whistle-blowers) to voice concerns
regarding the circumstances of gold extraction, trade, handling and export
in a conflict-affected or high-risk area. This will allow a company to be
alerted of risks in its supply chain in addition to the company’s own fact and
risk assessments.
2. Provide such a mechanism directly, or through collaborative arrangements
with other companies or organisations such as an Industry Programme or
Institutionalised Mechanism, or by facilitating recourse to an external
expert or body (i.e. ombudsman).
15. See Steps 2-5for information on monitoring suppliers and managing non-
compliance.
16. See Step 3, “Risk Mitigation”.
17. See step 3, “Risk Mitigation”.
74 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
SECTION II – SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
A. For medium and large-scale gold mining companies and
artisanal and small-scale mining enterprises:
1. Assign a unique reference number to each output, e.g. bar of gold doré, or
container of alluvial gold, and affix and/or imprint that reference number in
such a manner that its tampering or removal will be evident.
2. Adopt physical security practices over gold such as sealed security boxes for
shipment in such a manner that tampering or removal of content during
transport will be evident. In conflict-affected and high-risk areas, such
physical security practices should be verifiable by appropriate and trusted
third parties (e.g. customs authorities, independent auditors, Industry
Programmes or Institutionalised Mechanisms).
3. Support the implementation of the principles and criteria set forth under
the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI).18
B. For local exporters, recyclers and international traders of
Mined Gold and Recyclable Gold:
1. Assign unique internal reference numbers to all inputs and outputs, by bar,
ingot and/or batch of gold accepted and produced, and affix and/or imprint
that reference number on all outputs in such a manner that its tampering
or removal will be evident.
2. Coordinate and support physical security practices used by other upstream
companies. Promptly report any indications of tampering with shipments,
and unseal and open shipments only by authorised personnel.
3. Preliminarily inspect all shipments for conformity to the information
provided by the supplier on the types of gold, such as alluvial gold, gold doré,
unprocessed recyclable gold or melted recyclable gold. Verify weight and
quality information provided by the gold producer and/or shipper, and
make a business record of such verification. Report any inconsistency
between initial inspection of a shipment and information provided by the
shipper promptly to internal security and those responsible in the company
for due diligence, with no further action taken until the inconsistency is
resolved.
4. Physically segregate and secure any shipment for which there is an
unresolved inconsistency.
18. For information on the EITI, seehttp://eiti.org/. For a guide on how business can
support EITI, seehttp://eiti.org/document/businessguide.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 75

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
5. Seek to deal directly with legitimate artisanal and small-scale gold
producers or their representatives where possible in order to exclude gold
offered by persons that exploit them.
C. For refiners:
1. Assign unique internal reference numbers to all input and output, by bar, ingot
and/or batch of gold accepted and produced, which should correspond to all
the information collected on that gold input and output and generated through
due diligence, including supplier “KYC” information and the origin of gold.
2. Coordinate and support physical security practices used by other upstream
companies. Promptly report any indications of tampering with shipments, and
unseal and open shipments only by authorised personnel.
3. Preliminarily inspect all shipments for conformity to the information provided
by the supplier on the types of gold, such as alluvial gold, gold doré,
unprocessed recyclable gold or melted recyclable gold. Verify weight and
quality information provided by gold producer and/or shipper, and make a
business record of such verification.
4. Report any inconsistency between initial inspection of a shipment and
information provided by shipper promptly to refiner security and those
responsible in the company for due diligence, with no further action taken
until the inconsistency is resolved.
5. Physically segregate and secure any shipment for which there is an unresolved
inconsistency.
6. Record, and render all gold outputs identifiable (e.g. by physically imprinting
gold products, and/or affixing to packing material in such a manner that its
tampering or removal will be evident) with the following information:
a) Name and/or stamp/logo of the refiner.
b) Year of refining/production.
c) A unique reference allocated to each output (e.g. serial numbers,
electronic identification or other practicable means).
D. For bullion banks:
1. Create inventory lists for all gold held by bullion banks, which include
information on when each piece of gold was received and from whom.19
These should include records of grandfathered stocks.
19. Full information usually included on inventory lists include: Batch Name; Receive
Date; Metal; Type (e.g. large gold bars); Serial Number; Good Delivery / Non-Good
Delivery; Total Number of Pallets; Total Number of Items; Current Weight; Pallet;
Bar; Refiner; Gross Weight; Assay.
76 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
2. Provide, where possible, gold in accordance with customer requests for
specific refiners whose due diligence practices have been independently
verified to be consistent with this Guidance.
3. Maintain records of information imprinted on gold and the transaction
numbers of when downstream companies take physical delivery of gold.
4. Upon request, provide the information imprinted on gold and physical
delivery transaction numbers to direct downstream companies that take
physical delivery of that gold.
E. For all other downstream companies (e.g. downstream users
of gold and of gold materials and manufacturers of articles
that contain gold):
1. Request suppliers provide the identification of the upstream gold refiner/s
for gold-bearing materials and products, either by direct sourcing or via
marks imprinted on a refined gold product if available, or from information
provided by other downstream product suppliers or bullion banks.
2. If gold refiner/s are identified, request verification that the refiner/s has
conducted due diligence in accordance with this Supplement. Where
possible, seek reference to recognised audits by Industry Programmes or
Institutionalised Mechanisms that incorporate in their auditing protocols
the standards and processes contained in the Guidance.
3. Pass on information on the identification of the upstream gold refiner/s for
gold-bearing materials and products to downstream customers.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 77

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
STEP 2: IDENTIFY AND ASSESS RISKS IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN
OBJECTIVE: To identify and assess risks on the circumstances of extraction,
consolidation, transport, trading, and export of gold from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas.
Companies in the gold supply chain should use the strong management
system put in place under Step 1to identify and assess risks that the gold they
produce or purchase through their supply chains may be contributing to
conflict or serious human rights abuses.
All companies may cooperate to carry out the recommendations in this
section through joint initiatives. However, companies retain individual
responsibility for their due diligence, and should ensure that all joint work duly
takes into consideration circumstances specific to the individual company.
SECTION I – RISK ASSESSMENT FOR MEDIUM AND LARGE-SCALE
GOLD MINING COMPANIES AND ARTISANAL AND SMALL-SCALE
MINING ENTERPRISES (“GOLD PRODUCERS”)
A. Determine whether the gold producer mines or transports
any gold in a conflict-affected or high-risk area (“red flagged
operations”). To do so, review the context of each location of gold origin
and transport, relying on evidence from credible sources,20 and use good
faith efforts to make reasonable determinations based on the definition of
conflict-affected and high-risk areas provided in the Introduction to this
Supplement.
1. If the gold producer can reasonably determine on the basis of the
information collected under Step 1that it does not mine or transport any
gold in a conflict-affected or high-risk area, no additional due diligence is
required. The management systems established in Step 1should be
maintained and regularly reviewed.
2. If the gold producer determines that it produces or transports gold in a
conflict-affected or high-risk area, proceed to Step 2(B).
20. Review research reports from governments, international organisations, NGOs,
and media, maps, UN reports and UN Security Council sanctions, industry
literature relating to mineral extraction, and its impact on conflict, human rights
or environmental harm in the country of potential origin, or other public
statements (e.g. from ethical pension funds). Companies should also refer to any
criteria and indicators of conflict-affected and high-risk areas developed through
multi-stakeholder initiatives, including ongoing work related to the
implementation of this Guidance facilitated by the OECD.
78 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
B. Also determine whether the gold producer purchases any
gold (e.g. gold of artisanal and small-scale origin) potentially
from a conflict-affected or high-risk area. To do so:
1. Identify all mines and/or mine smelt houses where the gold producer
purchases Mined Gold from other sources, which may include ASM Gold.
2. Review the “KYC” information of those suppliers generated in Step 1, and
gain additional information on the origin and transport of those other
sources of Mined Gold, relying on first-hand evidence and credible sources.
3. Use good faith efforts to identify the presence of any of the following ’red
flags’ in a supply chain for those other sources of Mined Gold.
Red flag locations of gold origin and transit:
The gold originates from or has been transported through a conflict-affected or
high-risk area.
The gold is claimed to originate from a country that has limited known
reserves or stocks, likely resources or expected production levels of gold (i.e.
the declared volumes of gold from that country are out of keeping with its
known reserves or expected production levels).
The gold is claimed to originate from a country through which gold from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas is known or reasonably suspected to
transit.
The gold is claimed to originate from recyclable/scrap or mixed sources and
has been refined in a country where gold from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas is known or reasonably suspected to transit.
In each of these location-based red flag considerations, the risk is increased when anti-
money laundering laws, anti-corruption laws, customs controls and other relevant
governmental oversight laws are weakly enforced; informal banking systems operate,
and cash is extensively used.
Supplier red flags:
Suppliers or other known upstream companies operate in one of the above-
mentioned red flag locations of gold origin and transit, or have shareholder or
other interests in suppliers of gold from one of the above-mentioned red flag
locations of gold origin and transit.
Suppliers or other known upstream companies are known to have sourced
gold from a red flag location of gold origin and transit in the last 12months.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 79

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
Red flag circumstances:
Anomalies or unusual circumstances are identified through the information
collected in Step 1which give rise to a reasonable suspicion that the gold may
contribute to conflict or serious abuses associated with the extraction,
transport or trade of gold.
a) No red flags identified: If the gold producer can reasonably determine that
these red flags do not arise in that supply chain, no additional due diligence
is required for that supply chain. The management systems established in
Step 1should be maintained and regularly reviewed.
b) Red flags identified or information unknown: Any gold producer that
identifies a red flag in its gold supply chain, or is unable to reasonably
exclude one or more of these red flags from a gold supply chain, should
proceed to Step 2 (C) below.
C. Map the factual circumstances of the gold producer’s red
flagged operations and other sources of gold, under way and
planned.
1. Undertake an in-depth review of the context of all red-flagged locations and
the due diligence practices of any red flagged suppliers:
a) Review research reports, including from governments, international
organisations, NGOs, and media, maps, UN reports and UN Security
Council sanctions, industry literature relating to gold extraction, and its
impact on conflict, human rights or environmental harm in the country
of potential origin, or other public statements (e.g. from ethical pension
funds).
b) Consult with a combination of local and central governments, local civil
society organisations, community networks, UN peacekeeping units,
and local suppliers. Respond to specific questions or requests for
clarifications made by cooperating companies.
c) Determine (including through desk research; in-site visits to gold
suppliers; random sample verification of purchase records proportional
to risk; and a review and assessment of purchase and anti-money
laundering and counter terrorist financing (AML-CFT) procedures and
directives, if applicable) if upstream suppliers have policies and
management systems that are consistent with this Guidance and that
such policies and management systems are operative.
2. Establish on-the-ground assessment teams. Gold producers with red
flagged operations or other sources of Mined Gold should establish an on-
the-ground assessment team (hereafter “assessment team”) to generate
and maintain information on the circumstances of gold extraction, trade,
80 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
handling, refining and export (seebelow). Gold producers remain
individually responsible for ensuring that the requisite data is gathered, but
may wish to facilitate this by establishing such a team jointly in cooperation
with their customers or other companies in the upstream supply chain
supplying from, or operating in these areas, or via an Industry Programme
or Institutionalised Mechanism. Where ’joint’ teams are not possible, or
companies would prefer not to work jointly, companies should conduct on-
the-ground assessments independently. Companies and other concerned
stakeholders establishing on-the-ground assessment teams should:
a) Consider the following factors when contributing to joint on-the-ground
assessments with other companies: the size of the contributing
company and the resources available to conduct due diligence; each
company’s ability to access on-the-ground information and the position
of the company in the supply chain; and the reliability of the company’s
due diligence, as demonstrated by cross-checking the data provided by
the company on all gold inputs.21
b) Ensure that assessors are independent from the activity being assessed
and free from conflict of interests.22 Company assessors must commit to
reporting truthfully and accurately and upholding the highest
professional ethical standards and exercise “due professional care”.23
c) Ensure the appropriate level of competence, by employing experts with
knowledge and skill in as many of the following areas: the operational
contexts assessed (e.g. linguistic abilities, cultural sensitivities), the
substance of conflict-related risks (e.g. the standards in Annex II, human
rights, international humanitarian law, corruption, financial crime,
conflict and financing parties to a conflict, transparency), the nature and
form of the gold supply chain, and the standards and process contained
in this Guidance.
d) Provide assessment teams with access to mines, intermediaries,
consolidators and/or transporters within the company’s control or
influence, including:
i) physical access to sites, including in other countries where trans-
shipment or relabeling is likely;
21. For example, for gold from large-scale gold mines, the gold producer may be best
situated to collect the relevant on-the-ground information at the mine site, while
the other upstream companies ensure that the information is collected and
maintained in accordance with this Guidance and should collect additional
information on circumstances between gold producers and refiners.
22. Art 4, ISO19011: 2002
23. Art 4, ISO19011: 2002
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 81

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
ii)access to books, records or other evidence of procurement practices,
tax, fee and royalty payments, and export documentation;
iii)local logistics support and assistance;
iv)security for itself and for any information providers.
e) Establish or support the creation, where appropriate, of community-
monitoring networks and/or multi-stakeholder information units to feed
information into the assessment team. Review, and add to or create if
possible, interactive maps that indicate the location of mines, armed
groups, trade routes, roadblocks and airfields.
3. FOR LSM GOLD (WHETHER MINED BY MEDIUM AND LARGE SCALE MINING
COMPANIES IN RED FLAGGED OPERATIONS OR LSM GOLD PURCHASED
FROM OTHER SOURCES), in order to determine risk, obtain evidence of the
factual circumstances of gold extraction, processing, trade, handling,
transport and export (if applicable), which may include:
a) Location and identity by name of all gold mines for every output.
b) Location of points where gold is processed, e.g., consolidated, blended,
crushed, milled and smelted into gold doré or alluvial gold output.
c) Methods of gold processing and transportation.
d) How gold is transported and processes in place to ensure integrity, with
due regard taken of security concerns.
e) Location of transportation routes, points where gold is traded, and
points of export and import where borders are crossed (if applicable).24
f) Current production and capacity of mine(s), a comparative analysis of
mine capacity against recorded mine production, and record of any
discrepancies.
g) Current processing production and processing capacity of mine
smelthouse(s), and a comparative analysis of processing capacity against
recorded processing production, and record of any discrepancies.
h) Identification and “know your counterparty” information of all third
party service providers handling the gold (e.g. logistics, processors and
24. In cases where transporters do not wish to disclose this information for security
concerns, upstream companies should ensure that transporters carry out a risk
assessment on those transportation routes in line with this Guidance. Upstream
companies should request a report from transporters detailing their findings from
the risk assessment of transportation routes (i.e. the risks identified and steps
taken to manage those risks). Upstream companies should report on those risks as
outlined in Step 5. In cases where upstream companies are not using transporters,
or are able to obtain information on the transportation routes, they should carry
out the risk assessment of transportation routes themselves and report on those
risks as outlined in Step 5.
82 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
transportation companies) or providing security at mine sites and along
transportation routes. The identification should comprise the following
measures, but the extent to which such measures are carried out should
be determined on a risk sensitive basis:
i) identification of the ownership (including beneficial ownership) and
corporate structure of the companies, including the names of corporate
officers and directors;
ii) identification of the related businesses, subsidiaries, parents, affiliates;
iii)verification of the identity of the companies using reliable, independent
source documents, data or information (e.g. business registers, extract,
certificate of incorporation);
iv)checking government watchlist information (e.g. UN sanctions lists,
OFAC Specially Designated Nationals Lists, World-Check search);
v)identification of any affiliation of the company with the government,
political parties, the military, criminal networks or non-state armed
groups, including any reported instances of affiliation with non-state
armed groups and/or public or private security forces.
i) Operating licenses, e.g. mining, export.
j) All taxes, fees or royalties paid to government related to the extraction,
trade, transport and export of gold.
k) All payments or compensation made to government agencies and
officials related to the extraction, trade, transport and export of gold.
l) All payments made to public or private security forces or other armed
groups at all points in the supply chain from extraction onwards, unless
prohibited under applicable law.
m)The security services provided at the mine sites, transportation routes
and all points where gold is handled or processed.
n) The training of security personnel and its conformity with the Voluntary
Principles on Security and Human Rights.
o) Screening and security risks assessments of all security personnel in
accordance with the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights.
p) Militarisation of mine sites, transportation routes and points where gold
is traded and exported.
q) Evidence of any serious abuses (torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment, forced or compulsory labour, the worst forms of child labour,
gross human rights violations, war crimes, or other serious violations of
international humanitarian law, crimes against humanity or genocide)
committed by any party in mines, transportation routes and points
where gold is traded and/or processed.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 83

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
r) Information on any direct or indirect support to non-state armed groups
or public or private security forces (seeDefinitions).
s) If relevant, the number and name of sites where any artisanal and small-
scale miners operate on the gold producer’s concession, an estimate of
the number of miners and an assessment of whether they can be
considered to be involved in Legitimate Artisanal and Small-Scale
Mining (seeDefinitions).
t) If relevant, instances of conflict or tensions in the relationship between
medium and large-scale miners and artisanal and small-scale miners.
u) If relevant, any instances, reports or suspicions that ASM gold, or gold
from other sources, is being unknowingly introduced into the gold
producer’s processing operations (e.g. the mine smelthouse), and/or
fraudulently represented as being mined by the gold producer.
4. FOR ASM GOLD (WHETHER MINED BY ARTISANAL AND SMALL-SCALE
MINING ENTERPRISES IN RED FLAGGED OPERATIONS OR PURCHASED BY
MEDIUM AND LARGE-SCALE GOLD MINING COMPANIES), obtain evidence of
the factual circumstances of gold extraction, processing, trade, handling,
transport and export (if applicable). Companies should complement the
steps they are taking to progressively collect the following information by
referring to Step 3(C) and the Appendix of this Supplement to assist and
enable artisanal and small-scale miners to build secure, transparent and
verifiable gold supply chains:
a) Identification of the suppliers of all other sources of Mined Gold using
reliable, independent source documents, data or information; any
information on the government, political or military affiliations of those
suppliers including in particular any reported instances of affiliation
with non-state armed groups and/or public or private security forces;
and the geographic sourcing area those suppliers.
b) The mine(s) of origin, transportation routes and points where gold is
traded.
c) The artisanal mining team or association, and an assessment of whether
they can be considered to be involved in Legitimate Artisanal and Small-
Scale Mining (seeDefinitions).
d) Methods of gold processing and transportation.
e) Taxes, royalties and fees paid to government agencies and officials.
f) Identification and “know your counterparty” information of all third
party service providers handling the gold (e.g. logistics, processors and
transportation companies) or providing security at mine sites and along
84 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
transportation routes. The identification should comprise the following
measures, but the extent to which such measures are carried out should
be determined on a risk sensitive basis:
i) identification of the ownership (including beneficial ownership) and
corporate structure, including the names of corporate officers and
directors);
ii)identification of the related businesses, subsidiaries, parents,
affiliates;
iii)verification of the identity of the companies using reliable,
independent source documents, data or information (e.g. business
registers, extract, certificate of incorporation);
iv)checking government watchlist information (e.g. UN sanctions lists,
OFAC Specially Designated Nationals Lists, World-Check search);
v)identification of any affiliation of the company with the government,
political parties, military, criminal networks or non-state armed
groups, including in particular any reported instances of affiliation
with non-state armed groups and/or public or private security forces.
g) Militarisation of mine sites, transportation routes and points where gold
is traded and exported.
h) Evidence of any serious abuses (torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment, forced or compulsory labour, the worst forms of child labour,
gross human rights violations, war crimes, or other serious violations of
international humanitarian law, crimes against humanity or genocide)
committed by any party in mines, transportation routes and points
where gold is traded and/or processed.25
i) Information on any direct or indirect support to non-state armed groups
or public or private security forces through the extraction, transport,
trade, handling or export of gold.
j) Instances of conflict or tensions in the relationship between medium
and large-scale miners and artisanal and small-scale miners.
k) Any instances, reports or suspicions that gold from other sources is
being unknowingly introduced into the gold supply chain, and/or
fraudulently represented.
D. Assess risks in the supply chain. Assess the information collected
and learned through mapping the factual circumstances of the company’s red
25. See paragraph 1, Annex II of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance (2011).
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 85

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
flagged supply chain(s). The company should consider a “risk” any reasonable
inconsistency between the information obtained and the following:
1. The company supply chain policy, consistent with AnnexII of this
Guidance.26
2. The due diligence standards and processes contained in this Guidance, as
well as information obtained through Step 1of this Guidance.
3. National laws of the countries where the company is domiciled or publicly-
traded (if applicable). of the countries from which the gold is likely to
originate; and of transit or re-export countries.
4. Legal instruments governing company operations and business relations,
such as financing agreements, contractor agreements, and supplier
agreements.
5. Other relevant international instruments, such as the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises, international human rights and humanitarian
law and international anti-money laundering recommendations and
guidance.
SECTION II – RISK ASSESSMENT FOR LOCAL EXPORTERS,
RECYCLERS, INTERNATIONAL TRADERS OF MINED/RECYCLABLE
GOLD AND REFINERS
A. Determine Gold Origin. The assessment of risk in a supply chain
begins with the origin of gold supply. Different origins have different risks
and require different types of risk assessments (seeFigure1 – Risks in the
supply chain of gold from conflict-affected and high-risk areas in the
Introduction of the Supplement). All determinations of Gold Origin should
be based on reasonable and good faith efforts of the company relying on
evidence generated in Step 1as well as additional first-hand evidence
(collected through engagement with suppliers and desk research) and
credible sources.27 Local gold exporters, international gold traders and
refiners should assess and verify representations of suppliers with steps
26. See Step 1 (A) above and Annex II.
27. Review research reports from governments, international organisations, NGOs,
and media, maps, UN reports and UN Security Council sanctions, industry
literature relating to mineral extraction, and its impact on conflict, human rights
or environmental harm in the country of potential origin, or other public
statements (e.g. from ethical pension funds). Companies should also refer to any
criteria and indicators of conflict-affected and high-risk areas developed through
multi-stakeholder initiatives.
86 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
proportional to risk in order to make reasonable determinations of Gold
Origin.
1. For Mined Gold, the origin is the mine itself, whether artisanal and small-scale
mine or a medium or large-scale mine.
a) An exception to this is Mining Byproduct, such as gold obtained from the
mining of copper, a mineral outside of the scope of this Guidance.28 The
origin of Mining Byproduct gold should be deemed to be the point where
trace gold is first separated from its original mineral ore (e.g. the
refinery). The refiner’s due diligence should ensure that false
representations are not made to hide the origin of newly mined gold
through Mining Byproducts.
2. For Recyclable Gold, the origin is the point at which it becomes recyclable (i.e. when
the gold is collected for return into the gold industry to reclaim its metal value),
such as when it is first sold back to a gold recycler/refiner. The point at
which the gold becomes recyclable new origin as recyclable gold should be
reviewed by a refiner’s due diligence, to exclude false representations made
to hide the origin of newly mined gold.
3. Grandfathered Stocks, if demonstrated by a “verifiable date” to have been created
in their current form prior to 1January2012, do not require a determination of
origin. Only the presence of the “supplier red flags” (seebelow) should
trigger additional due diligence on suppliers to ensure that the trade and
sale of Grandfathered Stocks does not contravene United Nations sanctions
resolutions or enable money-laundering resulting from, or connected to,
the sale of gold reserves in conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
B. Identify Red Flags in the gold supply chain. Based on the
information on Gold Origin, and information generated through Step 1
(including all “KYC” information on suppliers), companies should identify
the presence of any of the following ’red flags’ in a supply chain for mined,
recyclable or existing stocks of gold:
Red flag locations of gold origin and transit:
The gold originates from or has been transported through a conflict-affected or
high-risk area.
28. For example, trace gold in copper sulphide ore does not lead to production of gold
in a form that is separate and independent of that ore until after the copper has
been fully refined to 99.99% pure cathode copper. At that point the trace gold has
become concentrated in residue electrolytic cell slimes to perhaps 2%, and those
cell slimes are traded to gold refiners for their gold content.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 87

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
The gold is claimed to originate from a country that has limited known
reserves or stocks, likely resources or expected production levels of gold (i.e.
the declared volumes of gold from that country are out of keeping with its
known reserves or expected production levels).
The gold is claimed to originate from a country through which gold from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas is known or reasonably suspected to
transit.
The gold is claimed to originate from recyclable/scrap or mixed sources and
has been refined in a country where gold from conflict-affected and high-risk
areas is known or reasonably suspected to transit.
In each of these location-based red flag considerations, the risk is increased when anti-
money laundering laws, anti-corruption laws, customs controls and other relevant
governmental oversight laws are weakly enforced; informal banking systems operate,
and cash is extensively used.
Supplier red flags:
Suppliers or other known upstream companies operate in one of the above-
mentioned red flag locations of gold origin and transit, or have shareholder or
other interests in suppliers of gold from one of the above-mentioned red flag
locations of gold origin and transit.
Suppliers or other known upstream companies are known to have sourced
gold from a red flag location of gold origin and transit in the last 12months.
Red flag circumstances:
Anomalies or unusual circumstances are identified through the information
collected in Step 1which give rise to a reasonable suspicion that the gold may
contribute to conflict or serious abuses associated with the extraction,
transport or trade of gold.
a) No red flags identified: If the local gold exporter, international gold trader
or refiner can reasonably determine that these red flags do not arise in that
supply chain, no additional due diligence is required for that supply chain.
The management systems established in Step 1should be maintained and
regularly reviewed.
b) Red flags identified or information unknown: Any local gold exporter,
international gold trader or refiner that identifies a red flag in its gold
supply chain, or is unable to reasonably exclude one or more of these red
flags from a gold supply chain, should proceed to Step 2 (C) below.
88 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
C. Map the factual circumstances of the company’s red flagged
supply chain(s), under way and planned.
1. Undertake and in-depth review of the context of all red-flagged locations
and the due diligence practices of any red flagged suppliers.
a) Review research reports including from governments, international
organisations, NGOs, and media, maps, UN reports and UN Security
Council sanctions, industry literature relating to mineral extraction, and
its impact on conflict, human rights or environmental harm in the
country of potential origin, or other public statements (e.g. from ethical
pension funds).
b) Consult with a combination of local and central governments, local civil
society organisations, community networks, UN peacekeeping units,
and local suppliers. Respond to specific questions or requests for
clarifications made by cooperating companies.
c) Determine (including through desk research; in-site visits to gold
suppliers; random sample verification of purchase records proportional
to risk; and a review and assessment of purchase and anti-money
laundering and counter terrorist financing (AML-CFT) procedures and
directives, if applicable) if upstream suppliers have policies and
management systems that are consistent with this Guidance and that
such policies and management systems are operative.
2. FOR MINED GOLD, establish on-the-ground assessment teams. Local gold
exporters, international gold traders or refiners with identified red flags
remain in all circumstances individually responsible for ensuring that the
information on the factual circumstances of the company’s red flagged
supply chain(s) is gathered. Local gold exporters, international gold traders
or refiners with identified red flags in their supply chains should establish
on-the-ground assessment teams to generate and maintain information on
suppliers (if relevant) the circumstances of mineral extraction, trade,
handling, refining and export. Upstream companies may establish such a
team jointly in cooperation with other upstream companies supplying
from, or operating in these areas, or via an industry or multi-stakeholder
mechanism or initiative. Where ’joint’ teams are not possible, or companies
would prefer not to work jointly, companies should conduct on-the-ground
assessments independently. Companies and other stakeholders
establishing on-the-ground assessment teams should:
a) Consider the following factors when contributing to joint on-the-ground
assessments: the size of the cooperating companies and the resources
available to conduct due diligence; the ability to access on the ground
information and the position of the company in the supply chain; the
quality of any previously established on-the-ground assessment teams
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 89

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
of other upstream companies, including gold producers; and the
reliability of the company’s due diligence, as demonstrated by cross-
checking the data provided by the company on all gold inputs.29
b) Ensure that assessors are independent from the activity being assessed
and free from conflict of interests.30Company assessors must commit to
reporting truthfully and accurately and upholding the highest
professional ethical standards and exercise “due professional care”.31
c) Ensure the appropriate level of competence, by employing experts with
knowledge and skill in as many of the following areas: the operational
contexts assessed (e.g. linguistic abilities, cultural sensitivities), the
substance of conflict-related risks (e.g. the standards in Annex II, human
rights, international humanitarian law, corruption, financial crime,
conflict and financing parties to a conflict, transparency), the nature and
form of the gold supply chain, and the standards and process contained
in this due diligence Guidance.
d) Provide assessment teams with access to mines, intermediaries,
consolidators and/or transporters within the company’s control or
influence, including:
i) physical access to sites, including in other countries where trans-
shipment or relabeling is likely;
ii)access to books, records or other evidence of procurement practices,
tax, fee and royalty payments, and export documentation;
iii)local logistics support and assistance;
iv)security for itself and for any information providers.
e) Establish or support the creation, where appropriate, of community-
monitoring networks and/or multi-stakeholder information units to feed
information into the assessment team. Review, and add to or create if
possible, interactive maps that indicate the location of mines, armed
groups, trade routes, roadblocks and airfields.
3. FOR MINED GOLD, determine if the Mined Gold is LSM Gold or ASM Gold.
a) For LSM Gold, cooperate with medium and large-scale gold producers to
obtain evidence, where applicable to the position of the company in the
29. For example, for gold from large-scale gold mines, the gold producer may be best
situated to collect the relevant on-the-ground information at the mine site, while
the other upstream companies ensure that the information is collected and
maintained in accordance with this Guidance and should collect any available
additional information on circumstances between gold producers and refiners.
30. Art 4, ISO19011: 2002
31. Art 4, ISO19011: 2002
90 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
supply chain, of the factual circumstances of gold extraction, trade,
handling and export, which may include:
i) Location and identity by name of all gold mines for every output.
ii) Location of points where gold is processed, e.g., consolidated, blended,
crushed, milled and smelted into gold doré or alluvial gold output.
iii) Methods of gold processing and transportation.
iv) Location of transportation routes, points where gold is traded, and
points of export and import where borders are crossed (if
applicable).32
v) Current production and capacity of mine(s), a comparative analysis of
mine capacity against recorded mine production if possible, and
record any discrepancies.
vi) Current processing production and processing capacity of mine
smelthouse(s), and a comparative analysis of processing capacity
against recorded processing production if possible, and record of any
discrepancies.
vii)Identification and “know your counterparty” information of all actors
in the upstream supply chain, including, but not limited to, the gold
producers, intermediaries, gold traders and exporters and re-
exporters, as well as third party service providers handling the gold
(e.g. logistics, processors and transportation companies) or providing
security at mine sites and along transportation routes. The
identification should comprise the following measures, but the extent
to which such measures are carried out should be determined on a
risk sensitive basis:
1. identification of the ownership (including beneficial ownership) of
the companies and corporate structure, including the names of
corporate officers and directors);
2. identification of the related businesses, subsidiaries, parents,
affiliates;
32. In cases where transporters do not wish to disclose this information for security
concerns, upstream companies should ensure that transporters carry out a risk
assessment on those transportation routes in line with this Guidance. Upstream
companies should request a report from transporters detailing their findings from
the risk assessment of transportation routes (i.e. the risks identified and steps
taken to manage those risks). Upstream companies should report on those risks as
outlined in Step 5. In cases where upstream companies are not using transporters,
or are able to obtain information on the transportation routes, they should carry
out the risk assessment of transportation routes themselves and report on those
risks as outlined in Step 5.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 91

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
3. verification of the identity of the companies using reliable,
independent source documents, data or information (e.g. business
registers extract, certificate of incorporation);
4. checking government watchlist information (e.g. UN sanctions lists,
OFAC Specially Designated Nationals Lists, World-Check search);
5. identification of any affiliation of the company with the
government, political parties, military, criminal networks or non-
state armed groups, , including any reported instances of affiliation
with non-state armed groups and/or public or private security
forces.
viii)Operating licenses, e.g. mining, export.
ix) All taxes, fees or royalties paid to government related to the
extraction, trade, transport and export of gold.
x) All payments or compensation made to government agencies and
officials related to the extraction, trade, transport and export of gold.
xi) All payments made to public or private security forces or other
armed groups at all points in the supply chain from extraction
onwards, unless prohibited under applicable law.
xii) The security services provided at the mine sites, transportation
routes and all points where gold is handled or processed.
xiii) The training of security personnel, and the conformity of that
training with the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human
Rights.
xiv) Screening and security risks assessments of all security personnel in
accordance with the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human
Rights.
xv) Militarisation of mine sites, transportation routes and points where
gold is traded and exported.
xvi) Evidence of any serious abuses (torture, cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment, forced or compulsory labour, the worst forms
of child labour, gross human rights violations, war crimes, or other
serious violations of international humanitarian law, crimes against
humanity or genocide) committed by any party in mines,
transportation routes and points where gold is traded and/or
processed.
xvii) Information on any direct or indirect support to non-state armed
groups or public or private security forces (seeDefinitions).
xviii)If relevant, the number and name of sites where artisanal and small-
scale miners operate on the gold producers concession, and an
92 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
estimate of the number of miners and an assessment of whether
they can be considered to be involved in Legitimate Artisanal and
Small-Scale Mining (seeDefinitions).
xix) If relevant, instances of conflict or tensions in the relationship
between medium and large-scale miners and artisanal and small-
scale miners.
xx) If relevant, any instances, reports or suspicions that ASM gold, or
gold from other sources, is being unknowingly introduced into gold
producer’s processing operations (e.g. the mine smelthouse), and/or
fraudulently represented as being mined by the gold producer.
b) For ASM Gold, obtain evidence of the factual circumstances of gold
extraction, trade, handling and export. Companies should complement
the steps they are taking to progressively collect the following
information by referring to Step 3(C) and the Appendix to assist and
enable artisanal and small-scale miners to build secure, transparent and
verifiable gold supply chains:
i) Identification of the suppliers of ASM Gold to the local gold exporter
using reliable, independent source documents, data or information;
any information on the government, political or military affiliations
of those suppliers including in particular any reported instances of
affiliation with non-state armed groups and/or public or private
security forces; and the geographic sourcing area those suppliers.
ii) The mine(s) of origin, the transportation routes and points where
gold is traded.
iii) The artisanal mining team or association, and an assessment of
whether they can be considered to be involved in Legitimate
Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining (seeDefinitions).
iv) The methods of gold processing and transportation.
v) Taxes, royalties and fees paid to government institutions and officials
on export.
vi) Identification and “know your counterparty” information (where
applicable) of the gold exporter and all actors in the supply chain
from the gold exporter to the refiner, including international gold
traders and all third party service providers handling the gold (e.g.
logistics, processors and transportation companies) or providing
security at mine sites and along transportation routes. The
identification should comprise the following measures, but the
extent to which such measures are carried out should be determined
on a risk sensitive basis:
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 93

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
1. identification of the ownership (including beneficial ownership)
and corporate structure, including the names of corporate officers
and directors);
2. identification of the related businesses, subsidiaries, parents,
affiliates;
3. verification of the identity of the companies using reliable,
independent source documents, data or information (e.g. business
registers, extract, certificate of incorporation);
4. checking government watchlist information (e.g. UN sanctions lists,
OFAC Specially Designated Nationals Lists, World-Check search);
5. identification of any affiliation of the company with the
government, political parties, military, criminal networks or non-
state armed groups, including in particular any reported instances
of affiliation with non-state armed groups and/or public or private
security forces.
vii) Militarisation of mine sites, transportation routes and points where
gold is traded and exported.
viii)Evidence of any serious abuses (torture, cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment, forced or compulsory labour, the worst forms of
child labour, gross human rights violations, war crimes, or other
serious violations of international humanitarian law, crimes against
humanity or genocide) committed by any party in mines,
transportation routes and points where gold is traded and/or
processed.33
ix) Information on any direct or indirect support to non-state armed
groups or public or private security forces through the extraction,
transport, trade, handling or export of gold (seeDefinitions).
x) Any instances, reports or suspicions that gold from other sources is
being unknowingly introduced into the gold supply chain, and/or
fraudulently represented.
xi) If relevant, instances of conflict or tensions in the relationship
between medium and large-scale miners and artisanal and small-
scale miners.
4. FOR RECYCLABLE GOLD,34 collect additional information (including through
desk research, in-site visits to gold suppliers and random sample
33. See paragraph 1, Annex II of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance (2011).
34. Recycled material is not itself a concern for contributing to conflict, however,
recycled material is a potential means of laundering gold that has been mined in
conflict-affected and high-risk areas in order to hide its origin.
94 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
verification of purchase records proportional to risk) for Recyclable Gold
from red flagged supply chains of Recyclable Gold using a risk-based
approach,35 with priority given to persons, places and transactions that
present higher risk. As an important part of risk-based due diligence,
suppliers and transactions should be identified and records made and
maintained at all levels. Such risk factors include, but are not limited to:
a) Value of a transaction. Beginning with the threshold of 15,000US
dollars36 for any transaction of recyclable gold outside a conflict-affected
or high-risk area, due diligence should be proportional to increasing
value. However, transactions at or near a mining area may include very
small amounts, e.g., one gram of gold. Therefore any transactions of
recyclable gold inside a conflict-affected or high-risk area, regardless of
value, should attract enhanced scrutiny.
b) Place of a transaction. Gold is valuable in small quantities and easily
transported, so no place is completely risk-free but higher risk places of
transactions include places where the location(s) of gold transit and
export are not reasonably reconciled with the declared location of gold
origin; where there is ready access to competitive markets or processing
operations closer to the declared location of gold origin; where AML/CFT
laws, anti-corruption laws, customs controls and other relevant
governmental oversight laws are weakly enforced; and where informal
banking systems operate in the country, including cash-based
economies.37
c) Type of material. Unprocessed Recyclable Gold is not as likely a vehicle
for laundering mined gold from conflict-affected and high-risk areas as
Melted Recyclable Gold (seeDefinitions), although there are cases where
the Unprocessed Recyclable Gold originates from areas where there is a
known practice of fabricating gold products directly from Mined Gold as
a means of tax avoidance or laundering gold. Mined Gold that has been
produced in a conflict area at a high concentration (e.g., 90% pure from
alluvial mining) is unlikely to be laundered through lower value
materials that require many more processes to upgrade and refine, as
35. While these records would not necessarily accompany materials in movement
through the supply chain, they should be available for subsequent tracking and
verification. Governments and companies in gold supply chains should refer to
the Financial Action Task Force 40Recommendations to combat money
laundering and terrorist finance, and specifically to its RBA Guidance for Dealers
in Precious Metal and Stones (June2008).
36. See Financial Action Task Force (FATF), 40Recommendations (2003) and Financial
Action Task Force, RBA Guidance for Dealers in Precious Metal and Stones, 17June2008.
37. Refer, Financial Action Task Force, RBA Guidance for Dealers in Precious Metal and
Stones, 17June2008, para. 109.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 95

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
well as significantly longer time for production of marketable gold.
Examples of low value materials that are not likely to be laundering
vehicles would be electronic scrap or residue cell slimes from refining of
other metals. High concentration gold jewellery, on the other hand, may
have similar physical characteristics to mined conflict gold.
d) Unusual circumstances. Material claimed to be recycled should be
considered for its reasonableness in context. For example, sudden
unusual increases in volume of high-grade material from a supplier or
area should be explained. If jewellery worn in a country is typically 14k
(58%), an offer claimed to be recycled jewellery at 90% should be
questioned.
e) Supplier. Different suppliers of recyclable gold will present varying levels
of risk for laundering-type activities. For example recyclable gold
produced on a controlled facility during manufacturing/processing
presents lower risks than a collector sourcing recyclable gold from
multiple sources. Other high-risk factors include any reasonable
inconsistency between the recommended due diligence processes of this
Guidance and the practices of suppliers; or the supplier “has significant
and unexplained geographic distance” from a supplier or counterparty in
the supply chain.
5. FOR RECYCLABLE GOLD, collect the following information of those
transactions requiring enhanced scrutiny, including through desk research,
in-site visits to gold suppliers, random sample verification of purchase
records proportional to risk, and a more in-depth review and assessment of
purchase and anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing (AML-
CFT) procedures and directives, if applicable:
a) Whether there are manufacturing facilities where scrap may be
generated.
b) Whether there is significant ownership and turnover of privately-held
gold jewellery.
c) Determine, through in-site visits and examination of documents, the
reasonably approximate level of business being done in recyclable/scrap
gold, recognising that it will vary, particularly with the price of gold and
economic conditions.
D. Assess risks in the supply chain. Assess the information collected
and learned through mapping the factual circumstances of the company’s
red flagged supply chain(s). The company should consider a “risk” any
96 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
reasonable inconsistency between the information obtained and the
following:
1. The standards of the company supply chain policy, consistent with
AnnexII;38
2. The due diligence standards and processes contained in this Guidance;
3. National laws of the countries where the company is domiciled or publicly-
traded (if applicable); of the countries from which the gold is likely to
originate; and of transit or re-export countries;
4. Legal instruments governing company operations and business relations,
such as financing agreements, contractor agreements, and supplier
agreements;
5. Other relevant international instruments, such as the OECD Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises, international human rights and humanitarian
law and international anti-money laundering recommendations and
guidance.
SECTION III – RISK ASSESSMENT FOR DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES
Downstream companies should identify the risks in their supply chain by
assessing the due diligence practices of their refiners against this Guidance.
A. Identify, to the best of their efforts, the refiner(s) of gold in
their supply chain(s). Downstream companies should aim to identify
the gold refiners that produce the refined gold used in their supply chain.
Gold refiners can be identified upon requests through the downstream
chain of suppliers, however downstream companies should assess and
verify representations of suppliers with steps proportional to risk. In some
cases, the gold will already have the refiner’s mark imprinted on the bar,
coin, rod or other refined gold product.
1. Refiners identified – Proceed to Step 2, Section III (B).
2. Unable to identify refiners after best efforts – Proceed to Step 3, Section II.
B. Obtain preliminary evidence of the refiner’s due diligence to
seewhether they have identified, or reasonably should have
identified red flags in their supply chains. All determination of
whether refiners have, or reasonably should have, identified red flags in
their supply chains should be based on reasonable and good faith efforts of
the company relying on evidence generated in Step 1as well as any
additional information (collected through engagement with suppliers and
38. See Step 1 (A) above and Annex II.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 97

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
desk research). Companies should verify representations of suppliers with
external sources of evidence proportional to risk in order to make
reasonable determinations.
1. Refiner has not identified any red flags: If a downstream company in a gold
supply chain can reasonably determine that these red flags do not arise in
that refiner’s supply chain, no additional due diligence is required for that
supply chain. The management systems established in Step 1should be
maintained and regularly reviewed.
2. Refiner has identified red flags in their gold supply chain, or does not know:
Any downstream company that identifies a red flag in their refiner’s gold
supply chain, or is unable to reasonably exclude one or more of these red flags
from their refiner’s gold supply chain, should proceed to Step2, Part III (C).
C. Assess risks by evaluating the supply chain due diligence
practices of refiners with red flags in their gold supply
chains. In order to carry out risk assessments, companies should assess
whether the refiners with red flags in their supply chain have carried out
all elements of due diligence for responsible supply chains of gold from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas recommended in this Guidance.
Downstream companies should:
1. Gain evidence on gold supply chain due diligence practices of the refiners.
2. Review the information generated by any risk assessment teams.
3. Cross-check evidence of due diligence practices of the refiners against the
supply chain policy and due diligence processes contained in this Guidance.
The company should consider any reasonable inconsistency between the
due diligence practices of suppliers and the company supply chain policy
(consistent with Annex II) as a risk that should be acted on in Step 3.
4. Determine whether the refiner’s due diligence practices have been audited
against a standard in conformance with this Guidance, and obtain the
results of that audit. In cases where the refiner’s diligence practices have not been
audited against a standard in conformance with this Guidance, or where any
inconsistency between the refiner’s due diligence and the standards and
processes in this Guidance is found, downstream companies should seek to
manage risks in accordance with Step 3, and seek to source from refiners
that are audited in accordance with Step 4of this Guidance.
98 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
STEP 3: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENT A STRATEGY TO RESPOND
TO IDENTIFIED RISKS
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and respond to identified risks in order to prevent or
mitigate adverse impacts. Companies may cooperate to carry out the
recommendations in this section through joint initiatives. However,
companies retain individual responsibility for their due diligence, and should
ensure that all joint work duly takes into consideration circumstances specific
to the individual company.
SECTION I – RISK MANAGEMENT FOR UPSTREAM COMPANIES
A. Report findings to designated senior management, outlining
the information gathered and the actual and potential risks identified in the
supply chain risk assessment.
B. Enhance engagement with suppliers and the internal
systems of transparency, information collection and control
over the gold supply chain from Step 1(C). Upstream companies
should:
1. Establish a chain of custody and/or traceability system that collects and
maintains disaggregated information outlined in Step 2, Section I and II, (C)
for all gold input and output from a red flagged supply chain.
2. Enhance physical security practices as appropriate to the circumstances
(e.g. security of transport, sealing in tamper-proof containers, etc.) over any
discrepancies noted in mine production and capacity, processing
production and capacity, or information provided by suppliers on gold
shipments.
3. Physically segregate and secure any shipment for which there is an
identified risk of association with conflict and serious abuses of human
rights.
4. Incorporate the right to conduct unannounced spot-checks on suppliers
and have access to their relevant documentation into commercial contracts
and/or written agreements with suppliers which can be applied and
monitored.39
39. See steps 2-5for information on monitoring suppliers and managing non-
compliance.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 99

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
5. For every gold input, share the following information gained and
maintained by the assessment team throughout the upstream supply
chain:
a) the mine of origin, with the greatest possible specificity;
b) locations where gold or gold-bearing material is consolidated, blended,
crushed, milled, smelted and refined;
c) the method of extraction (artisanal and small-scale or medium and
large-scale mining), and dates of concentrating, smelting and refining;
d) the weight and assayed quality characteristics;
e) the identity of all suppliers and relevant service providers handling the
gold in the upstream supply chain from the mine of origin until the
refiner; the ownership (including beneficial ownership); the corporate
structure including the names of corporate officers and directors; the
business, government, political or military affiliations of those
companies and officers within conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
f) all taxes, fees or royalties paid to government related to the extraction,
trade, transport and export of gold;
g) all payments or compensation made to government agencies and
officials related to the extraction, trade, transport and export of gold;
h) all payments made to public or private security forces or other armed
groups at all points in the supply chain from extraction onwards, unless
prohibited under applicable law;
i) how gold is transported and processes in place to ensure integrity, with
due regard taken of security concerns.
6. For refiners, make information generated through due diligence processes
available to auditors for purposes of compliance with Industry Programmes40
or Institutionalised Mechanisms, regional or global, once in place with the
mandate to collect and process information on gold from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas. Where no such programme or mechanism exists, make
relevant information available to downstream purchasers.
C. Devise and adopt a risk management plan. Companies should
adopt a supply chain risk management plan that outlines the company
responses to risks identified in Step 2in conformity to Annex II of the
Guidance. Companies may manage risk by either i) continuing trade
throughout the course of measurable risk mitigation efforts; ii) temporarily
40. See, for example, the LBMA Responsible Gold Guidance, the Conflict-Free Smelter
Program and the RJC Chain-of-Custody Certification, if consistent with this
Guidance.
100 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
suspending trade while pursuing ongoing measurable risk mitigation; or iii)
disengaging with a supplier in cases where mitigation appears not feasible or
unacceptable. To determine and devise a risk management strategy,
companies should:
1. Review the model supply chain policy on gold from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas in Annex II of the Guidance to determine whether the
identified risks should be mitigated by continuing, suspending or
terminating the relationship with suppliers.
2. Manage risks that do not require termination of the relationship with a
supplier through measurable risk mitigation. Measurable risk mitigation
should aim to promote significant and measurable improvement within six months
from the adoption of the risk management plan. In devising a strategy for risk
mitigation, companies should:
a) Build and/or exercise leverage over the actors in the supply chain who
can most effectively and most directly mitigate the risks of contributing
to conflict. Upstream companies already may have actual or potential
leverage over other upstream actors in the supply chain. Upstream
companies should find ways to constructively engage with suppliers and
relevant stakeholders and demonstrate significant and measurable
improvement towards eliminating the risk within six months from the
adoption of the risk management plan.41
b) Consult with suppliers and affected stakeholders and agree on the
strategy for measurable risk mitigation in the risk management plan.
Measurable risk mitigation should be adjusted to the company’s specific
suppliers and the contexts of their operations, state clear performance
objectives within six months from the adoption of the risk management
plan and include qualitative and/or quantitative indicators to measure
improvement.42 Companies should ensure sufficient time for affected
stakeholders to review the risk assessment and management plan and
respond to and take due account of questions, concerns and alternative
suggestions for risk management.
c) Engage in or support, where appropriate, Industry Programmes or
Institutionalised Mechanisms on responsible supply chain management
while ensuring that these initiatives take due account of their social and
41. Companies should refer to Annex III of the Guidance for the recommended risk
management strategy. Annex III includes suggested measures for risk mitigation
and some recommended indicators to measure improvement. More detailed
guidance on risk mitigation is expected to come from the implementation phase
of the Guidance.
42. See Annex III of the Guidance, Suggested Measures for Risk Mitigation and Indicators
for Measuring Improvement.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 101

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
economic effects on developing countries and of existing internationally
recognised standards.43
i) All gold producers with red flagged operations as well as other
upstream companies sourcing ASM Gold should assist and enable
Legitimate Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining producers
(seeDefinitions) from whom they source to build secure, transparent
and verifiable gold supply chains, consistent with the Appendix.
ii)All other gold producers with red flagged operations as well as other
upstream companies are encouraged to support the suggested
measures contained in the Appendix.
D. Implement the risk management plan, monitor and track
performance of risk mitigation, report back to designated
senior management and consider suspending or
discontinuing engagement with a supplier after failed
attempts at mitigation, in conformity with the recommended
risk management strategies outlined in Annex II.44 Upstream
companies should implement, monitor and track performance of risk
mitigation in cooperation and/or consultation with local and central
authorities, upstream companies, international or civil society
organisations and affected third parties as appropriate. Upstream
companies may wish to establish or support the creation of community-
monitoring networks to monitor or track performance of risk mitigation.
E. Undertake additional fact and risk assessments for risks
requiring mitigation, or after a change of circumstances.45 Supply
chain due diligence is a dynamic process and requires on-going risk
monitoring. After implementing a risk mitigation strategy, companies should
repeat Step 2to ensure effective management of risk. Additionally, any
change in the company’s supply chain may require some steps to be repeated
in order to prevent or mitigate adverse impacts.
43. OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (2011), Chapter II (B)(2).
44. Companies should suspend or discontinue engagement with the supplier for a
minimum of three months if within six months from the adoption of the risk
management plan there is no significant measurable improvement to prevent or
mitigate the identified risk.
45. A change of circumstances should be determined on a risk-sensitive basis through
on-going monitoring of the companies’ chain of custody documentation and the
contexts of the conflict-affected areas of mineral origin and transport. Such
change of circumstances may include a change of supplier or actor in the chain of
custody, place of origin, transportation routes or point of export. It may also
include factors specific to the context, such as an increase in conflict in specific
areas, changes in military personnel overseeing an area and ownership or control
changes in the mine of origin.
102 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
SECTION II – RISK MANAGEMENT FOR DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES
A. Report findings to designated senior management, outlining
the information gathered and the actual and potential risks identified in
the supply chain risk assessment.
B. Enhance internal system of transparency, information
collection and control over the gold supply chain from
Step 1(C). Include disaggregate and regularly updated information
tracking the identity of refiners (where identified) and resulting due
diligence findings from Step 2, Section III.
C. Devise and adopt a risk management plan. Companies should
adopt a risk management plan that outlines the company responses to
risks identified in Step 2. This strategy will differ depending on whether
refiners in the supply chain have been identified or not:
1. Unable to identify refiners – If after reasonable steps and good faith efforts in
Step 1and 2, downstream companies are still unable to identify refiners in
their supply chain(s), they should devise and adopt a risk management plan
that will enable them to do so. Downstream companies should be able to
demonstrate significant measurable improvement in their efforts towards
identifying the refiners in their supply chain. Downstream companies may
identify refiners in their supply chain(s) through individual efforts or
collaborative industry schemes:
a) Downstream companies should identify refiners through confidential
discussions with the companies’ immediate suppliers, through the
incorporation of confidential supplier disclosure requirements into
supplier contracts and/or by using confidential-information-sharing
systems.
b) Downstream companies that may find it difficult (due to their size or
other factors) to identify actors upstream from their direct suppliers,
may engage and actively cooperate with other industry members with
which they share suppliers (or downstream companies with which they
have a business relationship) to identify the refiners in their supply
chain and assess their due diligence practices. They may also identify
refiners through industry validation schemes that meet the
requirements of this Guidance in order to source therefrom.
2. Refiners identified with red flag risks in their supply chain – Downstream
companies may manage risk by either i)continuing trade with the refiner
throughout the course of measurable risk mitigation carried out by the
refiner in accordance with Annex II of the Guidance; ii) temporarily
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 103

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
suspending trade with the refiner while the refiner is pursuing ongoing
measurable risk mitigation; or iii)disengaging with a refiner in cases where
mitigation appears not feasible or where the refiner has failed to respond to
risks in accordance with the risk management strategy outlined in Annex II:
a) Take immediate steps to disengage with a refiner (directly or through
sub-suppliers) if the refiner has not immediately suspended or
discontinued engagement with its suppliers where reasonable risks of
serious abuses (seeparagraphs 1and 2of Annex II) or direct or indirect
support to non-state armed groups exist (seeparagraphs 3and 4of
Annex II).
b) When refiners are engaging in risk mitigation pursuant to Annex II46 or
where refiners are still in the process of fully implementing the due
diligence recommendations contained in this Guidance, downstream
companies should ensure refiners demonstrate significant and
measurable improvement within six months from the adoption of their
risk management plans. In devising their own risk management plans,
downstream companies should:
i) Build and/or exercise leverage over the refiners with red flags in their
supply chain(s), who may be able to more effectively and directly
mitigate the risks of contributing to conflict. Downstream companies
may build leverage over refiners through the inclusion of due diligence
performance into contracts (where applicable), or working through
industry associations and multi-stakeholder initiatives, while ensuring
that these initiatives take due account of their social and economic
effects on developing countries and of existing internationally
recognised standards.47
ii)Focus efforts on improving the refiner’s due diligence performance,
through value orientation or capability-training. Downstream
companies should also encourage their own and upstream industry
membership organisations to develop and implement due diligence
capability-training modules in cooperation with relevant international
organisations, NGOs, stakeholders and other experts.
iii)Consult with refiners and other common suppliers to agree on
measurable risk mitigation in the risk management plan. Measurable
risk mitigation should be adjusted to the company’s specific suppliers
and the contexts of their operations, state clear performance objectives
46. See Paragraphs 10and 14of Annex II of the Guidance on risk management of
direct or indirect support to public or private security forces, bribery and
fraudulent misrepresentation of the origin of minerals, money-laundering and
payment of taxes, fees and royalties to governments.
47. Chapter II (B)(2), OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises (2011).
104 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
within six months from the adoption of the risk management plan and
include qualitative and/or quantitative indicators to measure
improvement.
D. Implement the risk management plan, monitor and track
performance of risk mitigation, report back to designated
senior management and consider suspending or
discontinuing engagement with a refiner after their failed
attempts at risk mitigation (pursuant to paragraphs 10 and
14 of Annex II of the Guidance) or corrective action to
implement the due diligence recommendations in this
Guidance.48
E. Undertake additional fact and risk assessments for risks
requiring mitigation, or after a change of circumstances.49 Supply
chain due diligence is a dynamic process and requires on-going risk
monitoring. After implementing a risk mitigation strategy, companies should
repeat step 2to ensure effective management of risk. Additionally, any
change in the company’s supply chain may require some steps to be repeated
in order to prevent or mitigate adverse impacts.
48. Companies should suspend or discontinue engagement with the refiner (directly
or through sub-suppliers) for a minimum of three months if within six months
from the adoption of the risk management plan there is no significant measurable
improvement made i) to prevent or mitigate the identified risk as described in
paragraphs 10and 14of Annex II; or ii) in corrective action to implement the due
diligence recommendations in this Guidance.
49. A change of circumstances should be determined on a risk-sensitive basis through
on-going monitoring of the companies’ chain of custody documentation and the
contexts of the conflict-affected areas of mineral origin and transport. Such
change of circumstances may include a change of supplier or actor in the chain of
custody, place of origin, transportation routes or point of export. It may also
include factors specific to the context, such as an increase in conflict in specific
areas, changes in military personnel overseeing an area and ownership or control
changes in the mine of origin.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 105

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
STEP 4: CARRY OUT INDEPENDENT THIRD-PARTY AUDIT
OF REFINER’S DUE DILIGENCE PRACTICES
OBJECTIVE: To carry out an independent third-party audit of the refiner’s due
diligence for responsible supply chains of gold from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas and contribute to the improvement of refiner and upstream
due diligence practices, including through any Institutionalised Mechanism or
Industry Programme.
The recommendations in this section are not intended to be used as an
audit standard but outline some basic principles, scope, criteria and other
basic information for consideration by companies, Industry Programmes or
any Institutionalised Mechanism to commission a supply chain-specific
independent third-party audit of the implementation of the refiner’s due
diligence practices, either through new or pre-existing audit schemes.
Auditors may rely on audit conclusions from other independent third party
audits carried out for other purposes at points in the upstream supply chain
(e.g. KYC audits or audits of bullion transporters), so long as those audits
cover the areas as outlined below and are compliant with internationally
recognised auditing standards for the assurance of management systems.50
A. Plan an independent third party audit to verify the
implementation of refiner’s due diligence practices for
responsible supply chains of gold from conflict-affected and
high-risk areas. The audit should include the following audit scope,
criteria, principles and activities:51
1. The scope of the audit: The audit scope should include all activities,
processes and systems used by the refiner to implement supply chain due
diligence of gold from conflict-affected and high-risk areas. This includes,
but is not limited to, relevant policies and procedures, refiner controls over
the gold supply chain, communications with actors in the gold supply
chain, the information disclosed to downstream companies on suppliers,
chain of custody and other traceability information, refiner risk
assessments including the on-the-ground research, and refiner strategies
for risk management.
50. Examples of internationally recognised auditing standards include, but are not
limited to, ISO19011, SA8000, ISAE 3000, and SSEA100.
51. Companies may consult ISO International Standard19011: 2002 (“ISO19011”) for
detailed requirements on audit programmes (including programme
responsibilities, procedures, record-keeping, monitoring and reviewing) and a
step-by-step overview of audit activities.
106 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
2. The audit criteria: The audit should determine the conformity of the
implementation of refiner’s due diligence practices against an audit
standard that is based on this Guidance.
3. The audit principles:
a) Independence: To preserve neutrality and impartiality of audits, the audit
organisation and all audit team members (“auditors”) must be
independent from the refiner as well as from the refiner’s subsidiaries,
licensees, contractors, suppliers and companies cooperating in the joint
audit. This means, in particular, that auditors must not have conflicts of
interests with the auditee including business or financial relationships
with the auditee (in the form of equity holdings, debt, securities), nor
have provided services for the auditee company related to the design,
establishment or implementation of the refiner’s due diligence practices
and/or that of the supply chain actors assessed therein, within a
24month period prior to the audit.
b) Competence: Auditors must have the personal attributes as well as scope
specific competencies necessary to complete the third party audit.
Companies may consult internationally recognised auditing standards52
for detailed requirements on auditor competence when establishing new
or revising pre-existing audit standards. Personal attributes should
include, but are not limited to integrity, objectivity, confidentiality, open-
mindedness, and professionalism. Scope specific competencies include,
but are not limited to:
i) Auditing principles, procedures and techniques.53
ii)Supply chain due diligence principles, procedures and techniques.
iii)Gold procurement practices and gold supply chains.
iv)The social, cultural and historical contexts of the conflict-affected
areas of gold origin or transport, including relevant linguistic abilities
and culturally appropriate sensitivities for conducting audits.
v)The OECD Guidance and Gold Supplement, including the model supply
chain policy on minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas
(Annex II).
c) Accountability: An Industry Programmes or Institutionalised Mechanism
should periodically review and monitor the ability of the auditors to
carry out the audit in conformity with an audit programme, based on the
52. Examples of internationally recognised auditing standards include, but are not
limited to, ISO19011, SA8000, ISAE 3000, and SSEA100.
53. Companies may consider existing management systems accreditations and
completed auditor trainings such as ISO9001or SA8000.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 107

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
objectives, scope and criteria of the audit, judged against audit
programme records.
4. The audit activities:
a) Audit preparation: The objectives, scope, language and criteria for the
audit should be clearly communicated to the auditors with any
ambiguities clarified between the auditee and auditors before the
initiation of the audit.54 The auditors should determine the feasibility of
the audit based on the availability of time, resources, information and
cooperation of relevant parties.55
b) In-site investigations: Before beginning the in-site investigations,
auditors should prepare an audit plan,56 and all working documents.57
Auditors should gather further evidence and verify information by
conducting relevant interviews (including interviews with management,
as well as the assessment teams); making observations; and reviewing
documents (seebelow). In-site investigations should include:
i) The refiner facilities and sites where the refiner carries out due
diligence for responsible supply chains of gold from conflict-affected
and high-risk areas.
ii)A sample of the refiner’s suppliers (including gold producers, local
exporters, international gold traders, and recyclers) as may be required
in accordance with the audit standard.
iii)Consultations with the assessment team(s) which may be carried out
remotely, to review the standards and methods for generating
verifiable, reliable and up-to-date information.
iv)Consultations with relevant local and central governmental
authorities, and where they exist, UN expert groups, UN peacekeeping
missions and local civil society, as determined by the auditor to be
appropriate to the circumstances and risks identified in the gold
supply chain.
c) Document review: Samples of all documentation produced as part of the
refiner’s supply chain due diligence practices for gold from conflict
affected areas should be reviewed “to determine the conformity of the
system, as documented, with audit criteria.”58 This includes, but is not
limited to, documentation on supply chain internal controls (a sample of
chain of custody documentation, payment records), relevant
54. See Chapter 6.2of ISO19011.
55. Ibid.
56. See 6.4.1of ISO19011.
57. See 6.4.3of ISO19011.
58. See 6.3of IS019011.
108 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
communications and contractual provisions with suppliers,
documentation of information disclosed to downstream companies,
evidence from the refiner’s risk assessments (including all records on
business partners and suppliers, interviews and on-the-ground
assessments), and any documents on risk management strategies (e.g.
agreements with suppliers on improvement indicators). Documentation
should be sampled randomly by the auditors during the in-site
investigation. Sample chosen should take into account risks associated
with suppliers and/or gold supply chains; peak and non-peak periods of the year;
and volumes of material sourced from each supplier. Documentation reviewed
should include samples from each supplier as well as increase with the
level of risk associated with business partners, suppliers or countries of
origin of gold. Sample sizes should be increased if the auditor identifies
concerns related to the refiner’s due diligence measures.
d) Audit Conclusions: Auditors should generate findings that determine,
based on the evidence gathered, the conformity of the refiner’s due
diligence practices for responsible supply chains of gold from conflict-
affected and high-risk areas with the audit standard that is consistent
with the recommendations of this section of the Guidance. Auditors
should make recommendations in the audit report for the refiner to
improve their due diligence practices Auditors should also prepare an
audit summary report for publication in accordance with Step 5.
B. Implement the audit in accordance with the audit scope,
criteria, principles and activities set out above. All actors in the
supply chain should cooperate to ensure that the auditing is carried out in
accordance with audit scope, criteria, principles and activities listed above.
It is recommended that they do so through Industry Programmes or
Institutionalised Mechanisms to carry out some or all of the following
activities:
1. Draft Audit Standards in accordance with the recommendations of this
Guidance.
2. Accredit auditors;
3. Overseethe audit programme, including a periodical review and monitoring
of the ability of the auditors to carry out the audit in conformity with the
audit programme;
4. Publish summary audit reports of refiners with due regard taken of business
confidentiality and other competitive or security concerns. A summary audit
report should include:
a) Refiner details, the date of the audit and the audit period;
b) The audit activities and methodology, as defined in Step 4(A)(4);
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 109

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
c) The audit conclusions, as defined in Step 4(A)(4), as they relate to each
step in this Guidance
5. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For all upstream companies
a) Allow access to company sites and relevant documentation and records of
supply chain due diligence practices, in accordance with this Guidance.
b) Facilitate contact and logistics with transporters and suppliers selected by
the audit team, and any consultations with stakeholders identified by the
auditor.
c) If on-site visits of suppliers are required, facilitate contact and logistics.
6. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS – For all downstream companies
a) It is recommended that downstream companies participate and support
the independent third party audit of the refiner’s due diligence practices,
and are encouraged to do so through Industry Programmes to increase
efficiency in the implementation of this guidance. This may include
defining audit standards consistent with the recommendations set out in
this Guidance. Small and medium enterprises are encouraged to join or
build partnerships with such industry organisations.
110 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
STEP 5: REPORT ANNUALLY ON
SUPPLY CHAIN DUE DILIGENCE
OBJECTIVE: To publicly report on due diligence for responsible supply chains
of gold from conflict-affected and high-risk areas in order to generate public
confidence in the measures companies are taking.
A. Annually report or integrate into annual sustainability or
corporate responsibility reports, additional information on
due diligence for responsible supply chains of gold from
conflict-affected and high-risk areas, with due regard taken of
business confidentiality and other competitive or security
concerns.59
A.1.For all upstream companies
1. Company Management Systems: Report on steps taken to implement Step 1.
Included in such reporting companies should set out the company’s supply
chain due diligence policy; explain the management structure responsible
for the company’s due diligence and who in the company is directly
responsible; describe the internal systems of transparency, information
collection and control over the gold supply chain from Step 1(C) and Step
3(B), explaining how this operates and how it has strengthened the
company’s due diligence efforts in the reporting period covered; describe
the company’s database and record keeping system and explain the
methods for identifying all suppliers, down to the mine of origin and the
methods for sharing the information about due diligence throughout the
supply chain; disclose information on payments made to governments in
line with EITI criteria and principles (where relevant).
2. Company risk assessment in the supply chain: Report on steps taken to
implement Step 2. Included in such reporting, companies should explain
how the company identified red flag operations or red flags in their supply
chain, including the verifications of supplier representations proportional
to risk; describe the red flags identified in the gold supply chain; describe
the steps taken to map the factual circumstances of those red flag
59. Business confidentiality and other competitive or security concerns means,
without prejudice to subsequent evolving interpretation: price information;
supplier identities and relationships (however the identity of the refiner and the
local exporter located in red flag locations should always be disclosed except in
cases of disengagement); transportation routes; and the identity of information
sources and whistle-blowers located in conflict-affected and high-risk areas,
where revealing the identity of such sources would threaten their safety. All
information will be disclosed to any institutionalised mechanism, regional or
global, once in place with the mandate to collect and process information on
minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 111

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
operations and red flagged supply chains; outline the methodology,
practices and information yielded by the on-the-ground assessment team,
including whether and how the company collaborated with other upstream
companies, and how the company ensured that all joint work duly takes
into consideration circumstances specific to the individual company;
disclose the actual or potential risks identified. For the sake of clarity,
companies should not report risks identified for potential suppliers with
whom they have not done any business.
3. Risk management: Report on steps taken to implement Step 3. Included in
such reporting, companies should describe how company internal control
systems, such as chain of custody or traceability systems, have been
strengthened to collect and maintain reliable up-to-date information on red
flagged gold supply chains; describe the steps taken to manage risks,
including a summary of the strategy for risk mitigation in the risk
management plan, and capability-training, if any, and the involvement of
affected stakeholders; disclose the efforts made by the company to monitor
and track performance for risk mitigation and all the instances and results
of follow-up after 6months to evaluate significant and measurable
improvement. Disclose the number of instances where the company has
decided to disengage with suppliers and/or supply chains, consistent with
Annex II, without disclosing the identity of those suppliers, except where
the company deems it acceptable to do so in accordance with applicable
laws. Companies should aim to report all instances of disengagement to
relevant international and national investigative bodies and/or law
enforcement authorities, having regard for the potential harmful effects of
that reporting, and in accordance with applicable laws.
A.2.For refiners: In addition to the above, refiners should also:
1. Audits: Publish the summary audit reports of refiners with due regard taken
of business confidentiality and other competitive or security concerns. The
summary audit report should include:
a) Refiner details and the date of the audit;
b) The audit activities and methodology, as defined in Step 4(A)(4), where
an Industry Programme or Institutionalised Mechanism in conformance
with this Guidance and as defined in Step 4(B)(2) has not published these
details;
c) The audit conclusions, as defined in Step 4(A)(4), as they relate to each
step in this Guidance;
112 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
A.3.For all downstream companies
1. Company Management Systems: Report on steps taken to implement Step 1.
Included in such reporting companies should set out the company’s supply
chain due diligence policy; explain the management structure responsible
for the company’s due diligence and who in the company is directly
responsible; describe the control systems over the gold supply chain put in
place by the company, explaining how this operates and how it has
strengthened the company’s due diligence efforts in the reporting period
covered; describe the company’s database and record-keeping system.
2. Risk assessment: Report on steps taken to implement Step 2. Included in such
reporting, companies should describe the steps taken to identify refiners in
their supply chain; describe the assessment of their due diligence practices;
explain the methodology of company supply chain risk assessments;
disclose the actual or potential risks identified.
3. Risk management: Report on steps taken to implement Step 3.60 Included in
such reporting, companies should describe the steps taken to manage risks,
including a summary on the strategy for risk mitigation in the risk
management plan, and capability-training, if any, and the involvement of
affected stakeholders; disclose the efforts made by the company to monitor
and track performance for risk mitigation and all the instances and results
of follow-up after 6months to evaluate significant and measurable
improvement.
60. Publish additional audit reports or summaries, if any or if required by applicable
laws, of the downstream company’s due diligence practices with due regard taken
of business confidentiality and other competitive or security concerns.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 113

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
APPENDIX
Suggested measures to create economic
and development opportunities for artisanal
and small-scale miners
In conflict-affected and high-risk areas, artisanal and small-scale miners are
particularly vulnerable to adverse impacts and serious abuses associated with the
extraction, transport, trade, handling and export of gold. The vulnerability of
artisanal and small-scale miners is increased when artisanal and small-scale
mining operates in the absence of an enabling regulatory environment conducive
to responsible, conflict-sensitive gold production and legitimate trade.
This Appendix aims to minimise the risk of marginalisation of the artisanal
and small-scale mining sector, particularly the victims of extortion, while
promoting conflict-free gold supply chains, thereby creating economic and
development opportunities for artisanal and small-scale miners. This Appendix
proposes measures to build secure, transparent and verifiable gold supply chains
from mine to market and enable due diligence for legitimate ASM Gold to achieve
these objectives, including through formalisation and legalisation efforts.
Governments, international organisations, donors, companies in the
supply chain, and civil society organisations may consider the opportunity to
explore collaborative ways to make use of these suggested options or other
complementary approaches as they deem appropriate in accordance with
national laws and policies.
1. Assessment of mine sites consistent with the standards in Annex II of the
OECD Due Diligence Guidance:61
a) Create, participate and support local multi-stakeholder commissions
composed of focal points from civil society, industry and local and
central government, to overseethe mine site assessment process:62
i) develop clear parameters for assessing mine sites, transportation
routes and points where gold is traded, consistent with the standards
114 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
in Annex II of the OECD Due Diligence Guidance, and publish these
parameters;63
ii)set up teams drawn from the multi-stakeholder commissions to assess
mine sites based on these parameters, and publish results.
iii)focal points from multi-stakeholder commissions should solicit
updated information through their on-the-ground networks on the
conditions at mine sites, transportation routes and points where gold is
traded. Information should be stored in a central clearinghouse.
Information should be made available to assessment teams,
government agencies, and upstream companies sourcing from the
areas.
b) While considering the appropriate security options at mine sites:
i) disseminate this Guidance and make security forces aware of criminal
and other penalties for illegal involvement in the extraction, trade,
handling and export of gold; and
ii)support the formalisation of security arrangements between ASM
communities, local government, and public or private security forces,
in cooperation with civil society and international organisations, as
appropriate, to ensure that all payments are freely made and
proportionate to the service provided, clarify rules of engagement
consistent with the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human
Rights, the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the
UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law
Enforcement Officials.
2. Formalisation of operations,64 including through:
a) Knowing the reasons for lack of formalisation in existing artisanal
production and trading systems, in order to identify the best strategies
for incentivising and enabling formalisation.
b) Providing technical assistance to help formalise artisanal and small-
scale miners.
61. In the Great Lakes Region, this should be done through the national certification
programs implementing the ICGLR Regional Certification Mechanism. See also the
Vision for Responsible Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining in Alliance for Responsible
Mining (Echavarria, C. et. al. Eds.), (2008)The Golden Vein – A guide to responsible
artisanal and small-scale mining. ARM Series on Responsible ASM No. 1. Medellin.
62. See ICGLR Regional Certification Manual (2011).
63. See Appendix 3and 4, ICGLR Certification Manual (2011).
64. See Rock Solid Chances, Felix Hruschka and Cristina Echavarría, Alliance for
Responsible Mining (2011), available at http://www.communitymining.org/index.php/
en/arm-publications. In the Great Lakes Region, seethe fourth tool of the ICGLR
Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
“Formalisation of the Artisanal Mining Sector”.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 115

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
c) Acknowledging the diversity in the types and sizes of artisanal and
small-scale mining activity.
d) Creating and participating in collaborative initiatives to establish the
modalities and financing of support funds to assist with the
formalisation process.65
3. Legalisation of operations.66 Assist artisanal and small-scale miners to
obtain mining rights and other related authorisations through legitimate
processes. Consider other regulatory measures to legalise operations of
artisanal and small-scale miners. Where there are challenges regarding
illegal mining on mining concessions, all stakeholders concerned are
encouraged to facilitate constructive dialogue between title holders and
artisanal and small-scale producers, where those parties are acting in good
faith. In case of title disputes, mediated solutions should be sought through
cooperation with government and other stakeholders.
4. Assessment of trading hubs and regular mapping of transportation
routes:
a) Set up and participate in teams drawn from the multi-stakeholder
commissions (seeabove) to annually assess points where gold is traded
and transportation routes based on the parameters laid out above.
65. See Responsible Jewellery Council, Standards Guidance, “COP 2.14Artisanal and
Small-Scale Mining”, which lists the following analogous opportunities for large-
scale mining and ASM initiatives: “Providing financing (loans) for technical and
other improvements; Assisting and training miners on a range of issues (for
example, occupational health, reclamation, mining and processing methods,
value added processes, organisational and financial management, explosives
management); Aiding miners in the determination of mineral reserves (combined
with support for access to financing); Providing emergency response services;
Availing processing services to miners or building their capacity to implement
effective processing facilities themselves with improved technology; Liaising with
government departments, NGOs, trade unions and international agencies to
obtain additional support; Providing guidance on marketing and
commercialisation, including fair trade arrangements; Proactively supporting
alternative livelihoods, economic development, and other improvements in ASM
communities; Supporting the wider community by locally sourcing the provision
of as many goods and services as possible; Eliminating child labor as a condition
of engagement in the community; Improving women’s conditions in ASM
communities through gender awareness and empowerment programs.”
66. Responsible artisanal and small-scale mining comply with national legal
frameworks. When the applicable legal framework is not enforced, or in the
absence of such a framework,the good faith efforts of artisanal and small-scale
miners and enterprises to operate within the applicable legal framework (where it
exists) as well as their engagement in opportunities for formalisation as they
become available (bearing in mind that inmost cases, artisanal and small-scale
miners have very limited or no capacity, technical ability or sufficient financial
resources to do so)should be taken into account.
116 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
b) To avoid any potential contamination of sources, construct and maintain
secure depots at major points where gold is traded. In considering the
appropriate security options at points where gold is traded and along
transportation routes:
i) disseminate this Guidance and make security forces aware of criminal
and other penalties for illegal involvement in the extraction, trade,
handling and export of gold; and
ii)support the formalisation of security arrangements between ASM
communities, local government, and public or private security forces,
in cooperation with civil society and international organisations, as
appropriate, to ensure that all payments are freely made and
proportionate to the service provided, clarify rules of engagement
consistent with the Voluntary Principles on Security and Human
Rights, the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the
UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law
Enforcement Officials;
5. Establishment of traceability and/or chain of custody systems that
ensures security of shipments and enables data collection on all gold
from assessed mine sites. It is recommended that the assessment of mine
sites is immediately followed by the introduction of sound chain of custody
or traceability systems. Chain of custody and/or traceability systems should
progressively collect and maintain information for every gold shipment
from assessed mine sites.67
6. Providing financial support to i) multi-stakeholder commissions to assess
mine sites, transportation routes and points where gold is traded; and
ii)chain of custody and/or traceability schemes. Financial support may
take on a variety of forms, including direct support to initiatives, or royalties
and premiums on gold from assessed mines and transportation routes with
chain of custody and/or traceability systems in place.
7. Promoting and taking part in programs to directly and competitively
market ASM gold from assessed mine sites. Facilitate contacts and build
partnerships between artisanal and small-scale producers operating on
assessed mine sites, smelter/refiners, direct marketing of gold from
assessed mine sites passing through secure and verifiable transportations
routes.
8. Support the establishment of a grievance mechanism, consistent with
Step 1(E) of this Supplement, and take steps to enable artisanal and
67. For a detailed list of information that should be included in chain of custody and/
or traceability systems as they relate to specific minerals, seeStep 2(C) of the
Supplement on Gold.
OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016 117

SUPPLEMENT ON GOLD
small-scale producers to access this mechanism so they may alert
companies and government authorities of concerns related to the
extraction, transport, trade, handling and export of gold from conflict-
affected and high-risk areas.
9. Fostering cooperation between customs authorities of exporting and
importing countries.
118 OECD DUE DILIGENCE GUIDANCE FOR RESPONSIBLE SUPPLY CHAINS OF MINERALS FROM CONFLICT-AFFECTED… © OECD 2016

ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
AND DEVELOPMENT
The OECD is a unique forum where governments work together to address the
economic, social and environmental challenges of globalisation. The OECD is also at the
forefront of efforts to understand and to help governments respond to new developments
and concerns, such as corporate governance, the information economy and the challenges of
an ageing population. The Organisation provides a setting where governments can compare
policy experiences, seek answers to common problems, identify good practice and work to
co-ordinate domestic and international policies.
The OECD member countries are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, the
CzechRepublic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom
and the United States. The European Union takes part in the work of the OECD.
OECD Publishing disseminates widely the results of the Organisation’s statistics gathering
and research on economic, social and environmental issues, as well as the conventions,
guidelines and standards agreed by its members.
OECD PUBLISHING, 2, rue André-Pascal, 75775 PARIS CEDEX 16
(20 2016 02 1 P) ISBN 978-92-64-25238-7 – 2016

OECD Due Diligence Guidance
for Responsible supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
THiRD EDiTiOn
Contents
Recommendation of the Council on Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply
Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
Supplement on tin, tantalum and tungsten
Supplement on gold
isbn 978-92-64-25238-7
20 2016 02 1 P
OECD
Due
Diligence
Guidance
for
Responsible
supply
Chains
of
Minerals
from
Conflict-Affected
and
High-Risk
Areas
OECD Due Diligence
Guidance for Responsible
supply Chains of Minerals
from Conflict-Affected
and High-Risk Areas
THiRD EDiTiOn
Consult this publication on line at http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264252479-en.
This work is published on the OECD iLibrary, which gathers all OECD books, periodicals and
statistical databases.
Visit www.oecd-ilibrary.org for more information.