What is in Myanmar’s
first EITI report?
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) encourages the disclosure of natural
resource revenue data. An EITI candidate country since 2014, Myanmar published its first
EITI report in 2016.
Myanmar’s first EITI report covers USD 3.14 billion in oil, gas and mining revenues. 23.6%
It indicates that resource revenues accounted for at least 23.6 percent of total
of total
government revenues and around 6 percent of GDP in 2013-14. revenues
3000 2569
2500
Oil and gas accounted for the vast majority
2000
(85 percent) of these revenues. Gemstones and
1500
other minerals represented 13 percent and 2 percent
1000
389
500 54 of the total, respectively.
0
oil & gas gemstones minerals
• Corporate oncome tax
Tax
• Commercial tax
revenues
• Other taxes and duties
The report also documents how extractive revenues
• Royalties
Non-tax
are collected. In 2013-14, 85 percent of oil, gas and • State share of production
revenues
mining revenues came from non-tax revenues like • Other Fees
the state’s share of production and royalties.
• Corporate social responsibility
Social
• Local infrastructure
payments
• Resettlement and compensation
Revenues
50 However, only about half of revenues make it into the Union budget.
~ %
other
SEEs Approximately 50 percent of public money from oil, gas and mining are kept
accounts
by state-owned economic enterprises (SEEs) in off-budget “other accounts.”
Union budget
License holder
Although data remains incomplete, Myanmar’s EITI
report includes the first publicly available list of
active oil, gas, gemstone and mineral licenses,
updated as of March 2014.
Location

…and what is missing?
While the publication of Myanmar’s first EITI report represents a major step forward,
stakeholders must do more clarify understanding of the extractive industries and to
comply with the global EITI Standard.
Myanmar’s EITI report only includes 54 percent of emporium
Gemstone production
gemstone companies—a small fraction of the total industry. While
≥ USD 8 billion
the report covers approximately USD 380 million in gemstone revenues,
independent estimates put the value of jade alone somewhere between EITI coverage
USD 8 billion and USD 32 billion annually. ~ USD 380 million
Revenues are not reported on a project-by-project basis. This can
obscure the origin of resource revenues and increases the challenges to
evaluating company performance.
Licensing procedures and allocation criteria are not
clearly stated in Myanmar’s report. A requirement
under the EITI Standard, this information is key to Application Evaluation Approval
improving transparency and leveling the playing field in
oil, gas and mining.
?
?
The report does not include data on beneficial owners—the individuals
who ultimately benefit from resource extraction. Beneficial ownership can be
obscured by numerous means. Publishing beneficial ownership data will be
? required under the revised EITI Standard.
The terms of contracts and licenses remain secret, despite EITI guidelines that
encourage disclosure. This reduces stakeholders’ ability to monitor and enforce
companies’ financial, operational and social obligations.