Claude Kabemba

Southern Africa Resource Watch
Resource Insight
Special Edition June 2007
Resource Insight is published by the Southern Africa Resource Watch
Sothern Africa Resource Watch (SARW) is a project of the Open Society Initiative for Southern Africa
(OSISA).
ISSN:1994-5604
Key title:Resource Insight
Southern Africa Resource Watch
12th floor Braamfontein Centre
23 Jorissen Street
Braamfontein,2017
PO Box 678,Wits 2050
Johannesburg
Tel: 27 (0) 11 403 3414/5/6
Fax: 27 (0) 11 403 2708
Email: info@osisa.org
Editorial Team: Tawanda Mutasah,Claude Kabemba,Alice Kwaramba,and Stuart Marr
Design and Layout: Paul Wade
Cover Photograph: Eric Miller/iAfrikaPhotos
Production: DS Print Media
The opinions expressed in this Resource Insight do not necessarily reflect those of SARW/ OSISA or
its Board.Authors contribute to the Resource Insight in their personal capacities.
We appreciate feedback on this publication.Write to sarw@osisa.org or info@osisa.org
To order copies,contact publications@osisa.org

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
Contents
Acronyms 4
Acknowledgements 4
Introduction 5
Background 7
Reasons favouring the revision of contracts 9
The moral argument 9
The legal / rights based argument 10
Guidelines for reviewing mining contracts in the DRC 15
Objectives of the commission 15
The commission’s mandate 15
Composition of the commission 16
The process of revising the contracts 17
What the commission should look for in the contracts 18
Performance management 21
Implementation of the commission’s recommendations 22
Conclusion 23
Notes 24

Southern Africa Resource Watch
Acronyms
DRC Democratic Republic of the Congo
EITI the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
SADC Southern African Development Community
UN United Nations
Acknowledgements
SARW would like to acknowledge the key role played by Tawanda Mutasah, the Executive
Director of OSISA, for his intellectual contribution and guidance in the drafting of the
guidelines. Thanks also go to colleagues at OSISA who took time to comment on the draft
text and engaged with me in the debate around the legality and the legitimacy of the
Congolese government’s decision to review mining contracts. All contributions are greatly
appreciated and have enhanced the quality of arguments.It is our hope that these guidelines
will make a positive contribution to the revision of mining contracts already underway in the
DRC.
About the author:Claude Kabemba is the Director of the Sothern Africa Resource Watch
(SARW).
4

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
Introduction
These guidelines provide a framework, which the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC) government can use to ensure that the revision of contracts is fair,just and transpar-
ent.Minerals form part of a country’s national assets,the proceeds of which should be used
to help meet national development objectives. Mineral production constitutes a major
source of foreign and fiscal revenues for most African governments.For post conflict coun-
tries,such the DRC,resource flows from extractive industries could be a lifeline.However,
the existence of dubious mining contracts is a serious impediment to that objective,as is the
case in the DRC where dozens of mining contracts are suspected of being shady.The state
cannot intervene meaningfully in social service provision and in meeting other public sector
investment needs if it remains tied to what are clearly unconscionable contracts inherited
from a chequered political past. As such, the newly elected DRC government’s decision to
review mining contracts,and if need be to rescind them,is a step in the right direction.
This move has,however,created some agitation:there is uncertainty within government itself
about what is supposed to happen and how far it ought to go;and there is some trepidation
that companies may resist this move,while others have suggested that contract revisions could
scare away investors.But the government of Prime Minister Antoine Gisenga has decided to
face up to the challenge.On 11 June 2007 the Ministry of Mining launched the work of the
ad hoc government commission established to review 60 existing mining contracts.
The mining sector in the DRC is characterised by lack of transparency and irregularities
around the exploitation of resources.Although the exploitation is mostly done legally,there
are flaws in many of the contracts that favour the extractive companies,which draw exces-
sive benefits to the detriment of the host government and its people.The contracts in effect
allow for the plunder of resources due to the levels set for royalties,the tax breaks on cor-
porate investments and the issue of transferability.
The corrupt nature of the mining business in the DRC means that government cannot raise
enough money from the extractive industry, which is the country’s comparative advantage,
to promote efficient and equitable development and to work towards meeting the
5

Southern Africa Resource Watch
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).1 In fact, instead of contributing to growth and
development, minerals extraction in the DRC has done the opposite: it has contributed to
increasing poverty and unemployment,the destruction of the environment and the abuse of
human rights. Congolese working in this sector, especially those involved in artisanal min-
ing,are subjected to conditions sometime far worse than the slavery of King Leopold II.2
The revision of mining contracts should therefore be seen as part of a larger and unavoid-
able audit of the mining sector in the DRC.The commission should in the process also pro-
pose,where necessary,changes to DRC extractive industry legislation to ensure that it is in
line with regional and international norms and standards.
6

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
Background
The DRC’s successful elections of 2006 put in place the country’s first democratically elect-
ed government since independence some 40 years ago. However, the new democratic dis-
pensation has come with its own political,economic and social challenges.Two critical chal-
lenges facing the new leadership are the provision of basic services to citizens and the
rebuilding of infrastructure.
Importantly, the state is unable to generate resources internally and is dependent on inter-
national support to meet its financial needs.This is because despite its enormous extractive
industry potential (34 per cent of the world’s known reserves of coltan and 10 per cent of
its copper; other minerals include cobalt, gold, oil, timber, water, energy, uranium, gas
methane, manganese and zinc, to mention but a few), the DRC government is unable to
draw financial benefits from the extraction of its minerals and the country is one of the
poorest in the world,with per capita annual income of US$120.3
The contracts being called into question were signed during the DRC wars (from 1996 to
2003) or during the transition period after the successful Inter-Congolese Dialogue at Sun
City in South Africa.This is,of course,in addition to the many corrupt concessions made
in the mining sector over the years under Mobutu,and the myriad other arrangements that
have been made in more recent times as assets have been systematically looted, these pur-
porting to be concessions contemplated under the country’s Mining Code developed with
the support of the World Bank.
The mining sector is supposed to be the cornerstone of the DRC’s economic development.
The contractual arrangements signed between the Congolese leaders and investors remain
unknown to the majority of the Congolese people. In light of the UN Panel of Expert’s
Report on the illegal exploitation of the DRC natural resources, the Lutundula
Parliamentary Report and many other reports from Congolese civil society, people believe
that most of these contracts, if not all, are dubious. The Assembly of Bishops from the
Katanga Province,in its address to the new democratically elected Congolese leaders,argues
that only a few Congolese individuals are drawing benefits from the minerals,but the peo-
7

Southern Africa Resource Watch
ple are not benefiting. The bishops “… request that the law and legislation that guide the
exploitation of mineral resources be clear and the working conditions conform to human
dignity.”4
Together with some important challenges,the democratic dispensation has brought with it
unprecedented opportunities for the mining sector to play a leading role as a contributor to
the country’s reconstruction. However, for it to play this role successfully, it will need to
undergo extensive restructuring. It is in this context that we applaud the decision of the
DRC government to review mining contracts.
While the overall restructuring of the mining sector is necessary and expected,the proposed
revision of mining contracts is an important step towards arresting the resource spoliation
and human rights abuses taking place in the mining sector in the DRC – and which in the
context of war were not dealt with. But the democratic dispensation has given the
Congolese people their power back,and action in this regard is expected.We must bear in
mind,however,that corruption and mismanagement of revenue in other parts of the world
and on the African continent is raising discontent among populations and creating political
instability,and the same could happen in the DRC if there is no transparency in the way con-
tracts are signed and implemented.
The guidelines are divided into two parts.The first part examines the need for a revision of
mining contracts in the DRC, and the second part looks into ways in which this can be
done.
8

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
Reasons favouring the revision of contracts
The question that is raised repeatedly is whether the new government in the DRC has the
right to review contracts signed by its predecessors, especially since contracts between pri-
vate companies and government,as ultimate owner of the resources,are often complex.A
risk associated with complex contracts is that the true market value of the contracts may be
better understood by companies than by the government.5
It must be remembered that most mining contracts on the basis of which minerals are being
extracted in the DRC today, were signed under conditions of war and in the absence of
democracy.This situation did not favour fair contract negotiations between a weak govern-
ment and financially strong multinationals. In fact, in order to persuade multinationals to
take risks during a period of much uncertainty, the Congolese “government” at the time
signed contracts on terms that were not in the best interests of the Congolese people. In
this context two arguments – a moral argument and a legal/rights based argument – can be
made which justify and legitimise the Congolese government’s decision to review and revise
mining contracts.
The moral argument
The moral argument begins with the premise that the Congolese people have suffered
numerous atrocities – slavery, colonialism, dictatorship and war – all linked to exploitation
of the country’s natural resources.The Congolese have never controlled or benefited from
these resources,and today its 60 million people live in adverse poverty.
The recent war, which started in 1996 and which is continuing in the eastern part of the
country,killed over four million people.The war was associated with the control of natural
resources,as different groups fought each other in an attempt to gain control of the extrac-
tion of resources.It seems fitting,therefore,that with a democratically elected government
in place,the Congolese should take control of their natural resources.Part of this process
would thus naturally include the scrutiny of questionable contracts signed mostly during the
war and the transition period.
9

Southern Africa Resource Watch
It is estimated that 70 per cent of the DRC’s most valuable copper and cobalt reserves have
already been signed away to international companies.Former Zambian president,Kenneth
Kaunda, referring to how copper mines are being sold in his own country to international
investors,said something which resonates well with what is happening in the DRC:“We are
giving up control over our riches,and it’s a disgrace.The rest of the country has gone down-
hill.”6 In the DRC, as an African Development Bank and Organisation of Economic
Cooperation and Development recent report puts it: “Growth of mining is hampered by
overall bad management of resources,fraud and slow structural reform,and the country has
not been able to benefit fully from the opportunities provided by rising world metal prices.”7
A well-managed mining sector is critical for the DRC’s development.If the contracts
are not revised,the new government will find it difficult to meet its budgetary targets
and consequently deal with its pressing developmental challenges;and without devel-
opment and economic growth,there can be no peace.
The revision of mining contracts is therefore critical for the government’s own survival and
for the consolidation of peace and democracy in the DRC. Furthermore, the revision of
shady contracts is justified in that the government is now trying to break with a past char-
acterised by mismanagement, opacity and kleptocracy (resource plundering), and is in the
process of establishing a new institutional framework that conforms to the principles of
good governance,transparency and accountability.The government needs to be encouraged
and supported in this process.The revision of contracts would help minimise the cheating
that is happening in the extractive industry in the DRC.
The legal / rights based argument
The legal and human rights argument maintains that all contracts that were concluded in a
manner which did not respect national and international legal frameworks,norms and stan-
dards of good governance,transparency,accountability and respect for human rights can be
renegotiated. In a democracy, contracts are only secured if they are legitimate. Most con-
tracts which the Congolese government wants to revisit are suspected to have been conclud-
ed in bad faith,and are therefore illegitimate.Put differently,the interest of commercial con-
tracts cannot override the interests of the public.
There are precedents which suggest that it is possible to renegotiate and introduce adjust-
ments to mining contracts. A recent example is the Arcelor Mittal in Liberia. Johnson
Sirleaf’s government last year renegotiated a major iron ore mining project with Arcelor
Mittal that was signed during the transition under cater-taker president Gyude Bryant.The
revised deal boosted the state’s benefits and raised the total investment to US$1 billion.
10

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
The DRC government’s decision to review mining contracts can find justification within the
confines of national, regional, continental and international norms and standards. The
extraction of natural resources (oil,gas,timber or mining) is also regulated by international
legal provisions to protect human rights and the environment
At the national level,the Congolese legal framework has changed in recent years following
the adoption of the new Mining Code in 2002,the new investment legislation and the new
constitution in 2006.These instruments prescribe the manner in which minerals ought to be
exploited. The DRC Constitution in Article 9 recognises the Congolese state’s sovereignty
over its natural resources,while the Mining Code in Article 8 specifies that the state guaran-
tees the valorisation of mineral commodities in conformity with the nature of the code.
Chapter III of the Mining Code specifies the framework within which the acquisition of
mineral and mining rights should occur,and stipulates that “it must be done in a transpar-
ent,objective and efficient manner.”The Mining Code also prescribes the kind of sanctions
the state can put in place against non conformity with the rules and standards provided (see
articles 293,295,296,289,290,291 and 292).
At the international level,the United Nations (UN) through Resolution 1803,which set the
Principle for Permanent Sovereignty, recognises the existence of states’ sovereignty over
their resources.While it affords states wide discretion to dispose of their resources as they
see fit,it does,however,prescribe the context within which states must act.It requires states
to exercise this sovereignty in the interest of the people: “The rights of the people and
nations to permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth and resources must be exercised
in the interest of their national development and of the well being of the people of the State
concerned.”8 This is a permanent sovereignty doctrine which can also be found in the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,passed by the UN General Assembly in
1974 as a centrepiece of what came to be called the “New International Economic Order”.9
Article 2 of the Charter reads as follows:
1 Every state has and shall freely exercise full permanent-sovereignty,including
possession,use and disposal,over all its wealth,natural resources and economic
activities.
2 Each state has the right:(a) To regulate and exercise authority over foreign
investment within its national jurisdiction and take measures to ensure that such
activities comply with its laws and regulations and conform with its national
objectives and priorities …;(b) to regulate and supervise the activities of transna-
tional corporations within its national jurisdiction and take measures to ensure
that such activities comply with its laws,rules and regulations and conform with
its economic and social policies.
11

Southern Africa Resource Watch
It is clear from the Charter that the UN General Assembly reinforces a state’s authority
against unlawful exploitation of resources.
Another international principle that supports the Congolese government’s decision to
review mining contracts is the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (Ecosoc Covenant).It stipulates that the misuse of a nation’s resources is a violation
of human rights, and it obligates states to “respect, protect, and fulfill the rights it sets
forth.”10 Therefore,it will not be a contradiction – or wrong for that matter – to argue that
the Congolese government is within its rights and powers to reconsider deals which are
unlawful and harmful to its people.
At the regional level is the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Mining
Protocol, which came into force in February 2000. The objective of the SADC Mining
Protocol is to create a thriving mining sector that can contribute to economic development,
alleviate poverty and improve the standards and quality of life in the region. One of the
protocol’s areas of focus is the promotion and monitoring of internationally accepted stan-
dards of health,mining safety and environmental protection.The SADC Protocol also calls
for the economic empowerment of the historically disadvantaged in the mining sector.
Also at regional level, the SADC mining ministers in August 2001 approved the Mining
Strategic Plan,which spells out how the Mining Protocol would be implemented.It is also
critical to refer to the African Mining Partnership, which encourages the participation of
women in the mining sector.
At the continental level,the African (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’Rights adopt-
ed in 1986 (to which the DRC is a signatory) stipulates in Article 21 that:
“All peoples shall freely dispose of their wealth and natural resources.This right shall
be exercised in the exclusive interest of the people. In no case shall a people be
deprived of it.In case of spoliation the dispossessed people shall have the right to
the lawful recovery of its property as well as to an adequate compensation....”
There is in fact an outcry,both within the DRC and internationally,that the Congolese peo-
ple are being exploited and dispossessed of their resources by unscrupulous investors.
According to a man whose child works in a Chinese-controlled mine as a digger and earns
just US$5 a week:“They are just using him … There is a possibility we could have violent
confrontation.”11 It is sentiments such as these which have prompted the new leadership in
the DRC to revise existing mining contracts.
12

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
There is also pressure on the DRC government to take action because the DRC is a signa-
tory to the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI),which aims to promote trans-
parency and social and economic benefits in oil,gas and mining countries.The DRC is well
known for the level of spoliation of revenues from mining which go into private pockets.
Indeed,the enormous mineral wealth that lies beneath the ground of this vast country not
only has dubious connection with human development but it also appears to foster a per-
verted political and institutional culture,based on corruption.It is therefore not surprising
that despite the high price of minerals on the international market,the DRC has nothing to
show from the sale of its minerals.
There is thus need to strengthen the utilisation of revenue and this requires, on the one
hand, that companies pay internationally acceptable taxes and royalties and, on the other
hand,that the government has the capacity to collect these taxes and use the revenues col-
lected efficiently and in a transparent way.The EITI provides a framework within which this
can happen.
The African Charter stipulates further in Article 21 that:
“… States parties to the present Charter shall undertake to eliminate all forms of for-
eign economic exploitation particularly that practiced by international monopolies so
as to enable their peoples to fully benefit from the advantages derived from their
national resources.”
The Congolese government’s decision to review and revise mining contracts is a response
to studies undertaken by both national and international experts,which have pointed to the
existence of dubious contracts and to the fact that the exploitation of mineral resources
does not benefit the Congolese state and its people, but instead perpetuates human rights
violations.12
While there are sufficient grounds for the Congolese government to proceed and revise the
mining contracts,the process leading to their revision must also be transparent in respect of
international law, norms and standards. This is confirmed in the African Charter when it
states in Article 21 that: “The free disposal of wealth and natural resources shall be exer-
cised without prejudice to the obligation of promoting international economic cooperation
based on mutual respect,equitable exchange and the principles of international law.”
The revision of mining contracts will not be an easy process,and it is not supported by all,
especially those in government and companies who stand to lose.It is therefore critical that
the process be transparent and inclusive.
13

Southern Africa Resource Watch
There are good reasons to believe that increased transparency and the restoration of justice
in the mining sector in the DRC would be beneficial,indispensable,and morally correct for
both government and companies. Consistent transparency can increase productivity for
companies,boost revenue for government,and increase the protection of human rights for
citizens.This is why the process must not limit itself to the revision of contracts but must
also elaborate mechanisms that prevent similarly unconscionable contracts from being
signed in the future;in other words,mechanisms for protecting Congolese interests in new
contract negotiations must be secured.
Over and above the international and national instruments which regulate the exploitation
of natural resources,mining companies in the DRC need to incorporate into their activities,
among others, the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against
Women, indigenous people’s human rights safeguards, and the International Labour
Organisation’s Core Labour Standards.
The commission appointed to review and revise mining contracts in the DRC therefore has
numerous instruments, norms and standards at its disposal to lead a fair and transparent
process. The revision of contracts must also be informed by national policies, and these
national policies themselves need to be informed by the principles of stability,consistency,
stakeholder dialogue,management of expectations,social obligations and the tradability of
mineral rights.
14

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
Guidelines for reviewing
mining contracts in the DRC
Objectives of the commission
The objectives of the commission appointed to revise mining contracts have been defined
by the Ministry of Mines.13 However, if the process is to have any real significance, it is
important to determine whether these objectives, as defined, meet the expectations of the
Congolese people.If not,the objective must be redefined and clarified.
The commission’s mandate
Defining the role of the commission is not enough.The mandate of the commission must
be established very clearly in terms of its scope, operation, power and responsibilities,
before it begins its work.
The commission must have a well defined scope of work to be accomplished.The change
in concept from the “revision”of contracts to the “revisitation”of contracts has shifted the
commission’s focus,and this might impact on the expected outcomes.For example,does the
revisitation,which appears to be a watering down of revision of contracts include the can-
cellation of contracts that are found wanting in terms of the national legislation and inter-
national norms and standards which guide the exploitation of natural resources?
The commission’s powers must be clearly framed.For example,is the commission allowed
to decide whether contracts should be cancelled,revised or allowed to continue? Is the com-
mission’s decision binding,or is it simply expected to make recommendations?
The commission’s responsibilities must be articulated in a clear manner to avoid confusion.
Furthermore, the responsibility of the commission should not be limited to contract revi-
sion as such. In the course of its work, the commission must be able to identify areas for
improving the management of mineral resources by closing gaps in the country’s legislation
and by domesticating international and regional norms and standards.
15

Southern Africa Resource Watch
It is also not clear which state institution or body is empowered to take the final decision on
commission recommendations and who will execute such recommendations.
Composition of the commission
The composition of the commission was determined by government,and it is clear that the
commission’s permanent members with decision-making powers are government func-
tionaries.14 However, it would have been appropriate to have outside actors, such as civil
society,involved in the deliberation and adoption team.
We therefore propose the following:
1 Members of the commission must include representatives of all state organs identi-
fied in the Mining Code as having a role to play in the management of the mining
sector.This would therefore include:the Presidency,the Prime Minister’s Office,the
Ministry of Mining, the Premiers’ Office, provincial Ministries of Mining, geology
departments,the Cadastre Miniere,and others involved in the protection of the min-
ing environment.15
2 Members of the commission must have the relevant skills and competence to do the
job.The skills within the commission and the calibre of its members will determine
its success or failure. It is a positive sign that the internal rules of the commission
stipulate that the commission can decide to bring in outside expertise when neces-
sary;however,the fact that these experts will not be part of the deliberations reduces
the extent of their contribution.
3 The composition of the commission must comply with the spirit of the DRC con-
stitution’s prescription to respect gender balance.Women in the DRC have suffered
tremendous human rights abuses and they must be fairly represented in a structure
responsible for decisions that affect their lives and the lives of their children.
4 The commission members,taken individually and collectively,must be of high moral
standing and can have no vested interest or conflict of interest if the effective revi-
sion of contracts is to be ensured. This suggests that members must be neutral in
their judgments; and neutrality is a difficult notion, especially in matters as sensitive
and politically driven as this one.However,it is critical that the public (and the com-
panies involved) have a level of confidence in the commission,and that the commis-
sion operates without outside interference.
5 The commission must be independent, both in terms of its operations and in the
management of its finances. Although the commission must remain accountable to
16

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
the state treasury on how it uses the money received, financial autonomy will avoid
manipulations,which could include using finances to frustrate its operations,thereby
leading to unnecessary delays in the process.
The process of revising the contracts
The process must respect the following democratic principles and values:
1 The process must be transparent. This is critical if the final verdict is to be accepted
by all.The purpose of calls for transparency is to permit citizens to hold government
and its commission accountable for the decisions they may take.But despite its ben-
efits,increasing transparency is hard to do.Even when a given government or com-
pany would find it in its institutional interest to be transparent, individuals within
such institutions may prefer secrecy in order to cover up corruption, to protect
opportunities for rent-seeking, or simply to avoid public scrutiny. Transparency
means that “when there are adjustments to the terms of the contract,they should be
made in an open and transparent manner.”16
2 The process must be accountable.Accountability requires civil society participation and
parliamentary oversight – and these two principles can only be achieved through con-
sultation.However,the rules of the commission do not stipulate how it is to engage
with civil society,or what role,if any,parliament will play.As mentioned,we believe
that parliament should be involved in the process, especially the Parliamentary
Portfolio Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources. The revision of
mining contracts must be subjected to wide and detailed oversight. This parliamen-
tary oversight could be supported and enhanced during the course of the revision by
weekly and monthly reports on the commission’s progress.
3 A critical element for accountability is to ensure community participationso that people
are aware of what is happening.A consultative framework should therefore be estab-
lished whereby the commission is not cut off from the community, and which
ensures that the community is consulted. Democracy is not simply about elections:
elections alone cannot provide accountability unless citizens monitor the actions of
those whom they have put in power.For their part,multinational companies can no
longer assume that once they have signed mining contracts with a government,they
can do as they please.
4 For the community,even civil society,to make an informed contribution,people must
have access to information:there can be no transparency or effective consultation with-
out the provision of information. During the course of its work the commission
17

Southern Africa Resource Watch
could include in its activities site visits.This will allow the commission to have first-
hand experience of the destruction caused by companies, and to register people’s
concerns.This is part of what is called a “development-centred”approach.
5 A development-centred approach means that individuals and communities are helped to
take control of their own lives.Communities and civil society can play a role in assist-
ing the process by virtue of being closer to the sites of action, and by speaking to
those most affected by the adverse socio-economic impact of mining operations. It
is therefore in the interest of both government and the mining companies to hear the
voice of civil society and communities in this process.The people of the DRC have
never been consulted on matters concerning their resources,and the review process
initiated by government is an opportunity to start involving people and giving them
a say in how their resources should be exploited.
6 The process must be time-bound with clear completion dates to ensure that the revi-
sion of mining contracts does not turn into a long and frustrating process.While the
timeframe should not include legal actions that might be taken by different parties to
the contract,the commission must not be allowed to extend its work indefinitely.
A proper process for the revision of contracts must be based on:
• clear norms and standards for good practice;
• the effective participation of specialised civil society;
• appropriate parliamentary oversight;and
• mechanisms for ensuring citizens access to information around the work of the
commission.
What the commission should look for in the contracts
The responsibility of the commission is to assess the compliance of existing mining con-
tracts with the laws of the country,including mining legislation and international norms and
standards.When reviewing the contracts,the commission should therefore take into account
the following critical issues:
1 The commission must examine the fairness of the process that was followed to sign
the contracts. Contracts which were obtained through a flawed process can be
rescinded.The Mining Code in Chapter III stipulates that the process of negotiating
contracts must be transparent, objective, efficient and expedient in reception,
instruction and decision on mineral or mining rights.17
18

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
2 The commission must examine fiscal terms of mining contracts. The tax and tariff
structure of contracts, including royalty, dead rent, state taxes, etc., and the periods
for the revision should constitute a critical part of the revision.These must be com-
pared with what obtains in the competing major mineral-producing countries such as
Australia,Botswana,Canada and South Africa,to ensure that the DRC government
is receiving the tax revenues to which it is entitled. Where discrepancies are found,
they must be adjusted;and where there is proof that companies have not paid their
taxes and royalties,the companies concerned must be made to pay their arrears in full
before they are allowed to continue mining.
3 The commission must assess what the contracts say on issues concerning mineral
beneficiation,and the commission must identify and analyse minerals that have value
added potential.This would involve assessment of the impact of contracts on down-
stream mineral based industries.If there are no clauses dealing with these issues,they
must be introduced.
4 The commission must repeal confidentiality clauses in all the mining contracts,since
such clauses hinder the transparent accounting standards required by the EITI.The
prerogative of private firms not to disclose revenue,payments and contract informa-
tion is an infringement of the Aarhus Convention on Access to Information,Public
Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters.18
Business secrecy is too often simply a cover for bad behaviour.19
5 Furthermore, in an effort to improve revenue management and to guarantee a fair
redistribution of such revenues,the commission should insist that all mining compa-
nies doing business in the DRC endorse the EITI.As part of the EITI requirements,
companies are obliged to publish all payments made to government,and government
in turn must declare payments it receives from companies.
6 The commission must assess the degree to which mining contracts empower the
Congolese people. Empowerment here goes well beyond the simple provision of
jobs (although it is important and necessary for the mining sector to provide employ-
ment) to include real empowerment issues, such as Congolese participation in the
management and ownership of their resources through partnerships, shareholding
and the management of companies.Furthermore,gender mainstreaming in the min-
ing sector should be considered as critical to facilitate the active involvement of
women in the sector.
19

Southern Africa Resource Watch
It is in the interests of the Congolese economy for the mining industry to have a
wider spread of ownership, and the DRC cannot continue to have a mining sector
where the owner of the resources is a perpetual employee.
The commission could ask parliament to prepare empowerment legislation which
would oblige companies to include Congolese in their top management and to enter
into partnerships with Congolese junior miners. Such legislation is important in
ensuring that the Congolese benefit from their resources, which are mostly con-
trolled by foreign capital.
7 The commission must assess the legal framework.Normally,the framework should
guarantee the genuine participation of local communities at all stages of extractive
projects. This will mean only granting licences for extractive operations with the
prior consent of local communities,and where such projects have built in empower-
ment clauses.In other words,the “state should impose reasonable social obligation
upon holders of exploration and mining licences and should make commitment to
social obligations a requirement for the granting and renewing of exploration and
mining licences.”20
8 The commission must assess contracts in terms of companies’adherence to the pro-
motion of research and development in the mining sector.This is critical if the min-
ing sector is to remain relevant to the Congolese economy in the long run.
Companies must be required to invest in research and new technology.
9 The commission must verify the validity of the contracts. The Mining Code stipu-
lates two conditions in this regard,which translate into obligations,namely:to start
the exploration and mining in a relatively short period as agreed upon; and to pay
royalties.
10 The commission must assess the progressive nature of the contracts in terms of
human resources issues,corporate social responsibility and respect for human rights.
The following issues should be looked at: mine health and safety; human resource
development;housing and living conditions of workers;community facilities in areas
surrounding the mines;industrial relations;employment conditions;and land rights,
especially compensation and future benefits that should accrue to people.The com-
mission should also assess the impact of contracts on social equity, poverty allevia-
tion and employment creation.
20

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
11 The commission must evaluate if the contracts make reference to the protection of
the local environment (air, water, ecosystems and biodiversity). The commission
must request that concerned companies submit their environmental impact assess-
ment reports before mining commences,and that subsequent reports are undertak-
en and submitted during the mining period. The standards should include a provi-
sion which requests all companies to make available,in an accessible language,their
environmental impact assessment reports.The commission must propose to govern-
ment the adoption of standards and the establishment of procedures which would
ensure that mining companies’ operations do not result in, benefit from, or other-
wise contribute to human rights abuses or environmental degradation.
12 The commission must assess the economic impact of the contracts;for example,the
impact of a contract on economic activity in an area,on the cost of energy,and on
foreign direct investment.
13 The commission must assess the contracts vis-à-vis the promotion or transfer of
appropriate technology. It should look at positive or negative implications for the
transfer of technology to the DRC arising from a contract,as well as the impact of
the contract on local skills development.
14 The commission must assess the impact of a contract on decentralisation.In other
words,is the contract aligned with national,provincial and local development prior-
ities and objectives,and what impact does the contract have on the provision of,or
access to,basic services in the area?
15 The commission must ensure that all contracts are standardised in line with the exist-
ing legal framework, thereby bringing transparency, predictability and stability into
the sector.
16 The commission must also look into the nature of privatisation of public mining
companies and how effective it has been. This is in view of the fact that certain con-
tracts signed between public companies and private companies allowed the latter to
obtain their property rights cheaply.
Performance management
The commission must adhere to strict performance criteria.There must be a consistent,rig-
orous and open approach to performance management to ensure that the commission’s
objectives, mandates and timelines are respected. In addition, a system of checks and bal-
ances is needed to ensure that commission members keep within the agreed brief.
21

Southern Africa Resource Watch
One of the tasks of the commission must be to make proposals on institutional,legislative
and administrative reforms to prevent dubious contracts from being signed in the future.
These proposals should include measures to promote good governance,accountability and
the prevention of tax evasion and human rights abuses in communities.
The commission’s recommendations in the area of institutional reform will be included in
the final report of the commission to be submitted to parliament and government. The
commission’s final report must set out substantiated conclusions and recommendations on
the status of each contract, or each group of contracts. It must also provide an executive
summary,giving an overall appraisal of the commission’s performance in terms of its man-
date and organisation.
Implementation of the commission’s recommendations
After the commission has done its work,it might be necessary to send the recommendations
to another much smaller but specialised commission, such as a parliamentary commission,
to go through the commission’s work and to testify to the fairness of the conclusions
reached.
Government will then use the recommendations from the commission to initiate negotia-
tions with companies on how best to introduce changes to a contract that will suit both par-
ties.Government will put together a team of commercial lawyers to negotiate with compa-
nies.It is expected that honest investors will come to the table as,happened in Liberia.
In the interest of facilitating people’s participation and education on these matters,the com-
mission or the state should allow people and communities directly affected by a mining con-
tract to have a say on the work of the commission.This could also mean appealing against
the commission’s decisions.
Companies that refuse to renegotiate contracts should be “named and shamed” nationally
and internationally.
Government must put in place a task team to monitor implementation of the commission’s
recommendations for those contracts that are renegotiated to the satisfaction of both par-
ties.This task team must be well financed to ensure that it carries out its tasks efficiently.
22

Guidelines for the Revision of Mining Contracts in the DRC
Conclusion
The DRC is standing at a crossroads:it can either move forward and consolidate its democ-
ratisation process or simply remain in the present state of chaos.The way in which the DRC
government deals with the revision of mining contracts will determine strongly which path
the country has decided to follow.
The revision of contracts is a challenge to the current political leadership;the success of the
process will depend on the political will of the leaders in the DRC and whether they have
the courage to support the process until its logical conclusion.It is critical that the new lead-
ership publicly supports the revision process as being for the benefit of the greater good of
the country, even if it is inimical to the interests of certain leaders and their collaborators.
A successful conclusion of the process will therefore depend on the political courage of the
new leadership to stand the course,even when it doesn’t suit their interests and the interests
of powerful companies. The leadership therefore needs to invest some political capital in
this process.
A successful revision of contracts will bring equity and justice to the extraction process and
the distribution of revenue.In undertaking the revision,the primary objective should not be
necessarily the cancellation of contracts,but their adjustment.
The International community must also play a key role in ensuring that this process reach-
es its logical conclusion.In the absence of a legal argument to rescind contracts entered into
by the government,as many have suggested,the violation of human rights and other viola-
tions of international laws are sufficient arguments to suppport the action of the Congolese
government.If nothing is done to these contracts,Congolese people will conclude that the
international systems of laws and policies remain the tools at the disposal of the northern-
ers,in the construction of a political agenda that favours the rapacious activity of their cor-
porate enterprises.
23

Southern Africa Resource Watch
Notes
1 In the outcome document of the International Conference on Financing for Development (the
Monterrey Consensus) developing countries committed to intensify efforts to mobilise resources
from domestic sources in an effort to deal with financing shortfalls.
2 Leopold’s rule over the DRC conditioned by the exploitation of natural resources resulted in
heinous crimes against humanity.Adam hechschild’s book,King Leopold’s Ghost-A Story of
Greed,Terror and heroism in Colonial Africa is a convincing narration of the atrocities he
committed.
3 World Bank,2006.
4 Assembly of Bishops,Katanga Province,e address to the new democratically elected Congolese
leaders,3 March 2007
5 Humphreys Macartan,Sachs Jeffrey & Joseph Stiglitz (eds).2007.Escaping the Resource Curse.,New
York:Colombia University Press, p 41.
6 See Dr.Kenneth Kaunda’s interview with Spiegel,April 2007.
7 African Development Bank/Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development Report,
2007
8 Permanent Sovereignty Over Natural Resources,UN General Assembly Resolutions 1803 (XVII),
art.1,17 UN.GAOR Supp.(No.17) at 15,UN DocA/5217(1962).
9 Ibid.
10 International Covenant on Economic,Social and Cultural Rights,adopted and opened for
signature,UN General Assembly Resolution 2200A (XXI),16 December 1966,entry into force23
March 1976.
11 Barta,Patrick 2007.“Miners’daunting task:digging in risky zones”,The Wall Street Journal,
Wednesday 31 October 2007.
12 See the Lutundula Parliamentary Commission Report,2004 and the United Nations Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of the Mineral Resources of the DRC,2001.
13 See Government Ad Hoc Commission for the ‘Revisitation’of Mining Contracts,internal rules;
Ministry of Mines,DRC,2007,p 1.
14 Ibid,p 2.
15 DRC Mining Code,Law No 007/2002 of 11 July 2002.See Official Journal of the Democratic Republic
of Congo,Special Report,15 July 2002,p 6.
16 Humphreys Macartan,Sachs Jeffrey & Joseph Stiglitz (eds) 2007.Escaping the Resource Curse.New
York:Colombia University Press,p 4
17 Ibid,p 9.
18 Convention on Access to Information,Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to
Justice in Environmental matters,Aarhus,Denmark,25 June 1998.
http://www.unece.org/en/pp/documents/cep43e.pdf (17 April 2007)
19 Humphreys Macartan,Sachs Jeffrey & Joseph Stiglitz (eds) 2007.Escaping the Resource Curse.New
York:Colombia University Press,p 44.
20 United Nations Economic Commission for Africa,Harmonization of Mining Policies, Standards,
Legislative and Regulatory Frameworks in Southern Africa,UNECA,Southern Africa Office,2004,
p 54
24