Burma 2023 Human Rights Report
Executive Summary
The human rights situation in Burma deteriorated during the year as the
conflict between the military regime and opposition forces escalated.
Deposed State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi, President Win Myint, and other
leading members of the deposed civilian government and the National
League for Democracy party remained in detention.
Significant human rights issues included credible reports of: unlawful
killings, including extrajudicial killings; enforced disappearance; torture or
cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by the regime; harsh
and life-threatening prison conditions; arbitrary arrest or detention; serious
problems with the independence of the judiciary; political prisoners or
detainees; transnational repression against individuals in another country;
arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy; punishment of family
members for alleged offenses by a relative; serious abuses in a conflict,
including reportedly unlawful or widespread civilian harm, enforced
disappearances or abductions, torture, and physical abuses or punishment;
unlawful recruitment or use of children in an armed conflict by the regime
as well as some ethnic armed organizations; serious restrictions on freedom
of expression and media freedom, including violence or threats of violence
against journalists, unjustified arrests or prosecutions of journalists,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 2 of 57
censorship, and the enforcement of or threat to enforce criminal libel laws;
substantial interference with the freedom of peaceful assembly and
freedom of association; restrictions on religious freedom; restrictions on
freedom of movement; inability of citizens to change their government
peacefully through free and fair elections; serious and unreasonable
restrictions on political participation; serious government corruption;
extensive gender-based violence; crimes involving violence or threats of
violence targeting members of national and ethnic minority groups;
trafficking in persons, including forced labor; laws criminalizing consensual
same-sex sexual conduct between adults (although those laws were rarely
enforced); prohibiting independent trade unions and significant restrictions
on workers’ freedom of association, including violence and threats against
labor activists; and some of the worst forms of child labor.
The government did not take credible steps to identify and punish officials
who may have committed human rights abuses.
Some ethnic armed organizations and Peoples Defense Force groups or
members committed human rights abuses, including killings,
disappearances, and physical abuse and degrading treatment. This included
a number of abuses of civilians in connection with the armed conflict.
Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person
a. Arbitrary Deprivation of Life and Other Unlawful or
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 3 of 57
Politically Motivated Killings
There were numerous reports that regime security forces committed
arbitrary or unlawful killings, including extrajudicial killings of civilians,
prisoners, and other persons in their power. According to the Assistance
Association for Political Prisoners (AAPP), which noted that the actual
number was likely to be much higher, there were 4,162 verified reports of
persons killed by the regime as of October 31. According to the National
League for Democracy’s (NLD’s) Human Rights Documentation Team, as of
August 22, regime security forces killed at least 100 NLD members, including
11 women and three elected parliament members during arrest or
interrogation or while in detention.
On January 4-5, the website Irrawaddy reported that regime soldiers
arrested nine NLD party members from three villages in Myittha Township
of Mandalay Region. Myo Lin, an NLD member from Htein Kan village, was
allegedly killed during interrogation, and his body was not returned to his
family.
On July 10, Burma Human Rights Network reported that at least eight
students detained in Bago prisons had died from the regime’s abuses during
interrogation. The regime claimed the deaths occurred during attempted
escapes while the eight were being transported to Insein Prison in Rangoon.
The regime encouraged the development of proxy vigilantes to target
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 4 of 57
prodemocracy groups and their families. The groups – many operating
under the name of Thway Thauk, or “Blood Comrades” – operated primarily
in urban areas such as Mandalay, Rangoon, and in the Tanintharyi Region.
Similarly, the military-trained Pyu Saw Htee group operated in other
regional areas and reportedly killed multiple NLD supporters. As of August
22, according to the NLD’s Human Rights Documentation Team, these
groups killed 269 persons, 233 civilians and 36 NLD members during its “Red
Operation,” an assassination campaign directed at NLD and People’s
Defense Force (PDF) members and their families.
b. Disappearance
There were numerous reports of disappearances allegedly committed by the
regime.
On March 12, the Karenni Human Rights Group reported that the regime
Light Infantry Division No. 66 entered the Khong Tar internally displaced
persons (IDP) camp in Loikaw, Kayah State, and detained several residents,
allegedly to use them as human shields. At year’s end, requests for
information regarding their whereabouts by the families and local media
outlets remained unanswered by regime authorities.
On August 30, Karen Human Rights Group stated that since the 2021 coup
more than 72 civilians were reported as victims of enforced disappearance
in the country’s southeast. Regime forces allegedly arrested the
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 5 of 57
disappeared villagers without warning and due process and neither
acknowledged any arrests nor informed families of the whereabouts of
those disappeared.
c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and Other Related Abuses
The law prohibited torture; however, the emergency order establishing the
regime authorized it to disregard any law, and members of regime security
forces reportedly tortured and otherwise abused suspects, prisoners,
detainees, and others. Such incidents occurred, for example, during
interrogations and were widely reported across the country. Harsh
interrogation techniques were allegedly designed to intimidate and disorient
and included severe beatings and deprivation of food, water, and sleep.
On August 7, the news service Myanmar Now reported details of physical
abuses in Thayarwaddy Prison, including forced 24-hour work shifts
particularly targeting prodemocracy political prisoners.
According to nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), women in custody
were subjected to sexual and gender-based violence and verbal abuse.
Women who reported sexual violence faced further abuse by police and the
possibility of being sued for impugning the dignity of the perpetrator.
Impunity for rights abuses was pervasive for regime officials and security
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 6 of 57
force leaders and members. The regime routinely denied responsibility for
atrocities and abuses. The Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar established by the UN Human Rights Council stated in its 2023
annual report that regime armed forces’ failure to investigate or to
otherwise curtail the pattern of combat-related war crimes was significant.
Prison and Detention Center Conditions
Conditions in prisons, labor camps, and military detention facilities were
reportedly harsh and frequently life threatening due to overcrowding;
degrading and abusive treatment; and inadequate access to medical care
(including COVID-19 treatment) and basic needs, including food, shelter, and
hygiene.
Abusive Physical Conditions: There were 50 known prisons and 50 known
labor camps, including two new prisons still under construction, according to
the AAPP. Labor camps, which predated the coup, existed across the
country; the regime provided no information on conditions in the camps or
the number of inmates. The military’s practice of using public facilities (e.g.,
community halls) as interrogation centers continued, according to the AAPP.
Several reports documented poor conditions within prison facilities,
including inadequate sewage systems, insufficient – and often inedible –
rations, and a lack of basic necessities. Overcrowding was reportedly a
serious problem in many prisons and labor camps. Insein Prison reportedly
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 7 of 57
held 220 inmates in a 1,200-square-foot room.
Medical care was inadequate, and this reportedly contributed to deaths in
custody. Reports indicated prisoners suffered from many health problems,
including COVID-19, malaria, heart disease, high blood pressure,
tuberculosis, skin diseases, and intestinal illnesses caused or exacerbated by
unhygienic conditions and spoiled food.
Conditions for women were deplorable, with a lack of access to sufficient
toilets and no privacy. Prison guards denied requests for sanitary products
for menstruation and other basic hygiene products.
Administration: The Department of Corrections in the Ministry of Home
Affairs operated the prisons and labor camp system.
Prisoners and detainees could sometimes submit complaints to judicial
authorities prior to the coup, but there was no clear legal or administrative
protection for this right. As of October, there was no credible evidence of
prisoners and detainees submitting complaints.
Independent Monitoring: The regime denied access to prisons and
detention sites by the International Committee of the Red Cross, the UN
Office on Drugs and Crime, and other independent nongovernmental
observers. According to regime-controlled media, the Myanmar National
Human Rights Commission visited the Maubin Prison in Ayeyawady Region
on October 10.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 8 of 57
d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention
The law did not prohibit arbitrary arrest. Persons held generally were
unable to exercise their legal right to appeal the legality of their arrest or
detention either administratively or before a court.
Arrest Procedures and Treatment of Detainees
The law allowed authorities to order the detention without charge or trial of
anyone they believed was performing or might perform any act that
endangered the sovereignty and security of the state or public peace and
tranquility. Aspects of the privacy protection law remained suspended by
the regime to legalize arrests and private property searches without a
warrant.
For crimes carrying potential sentences of less than seven years’
imprisonment, the law allowed authorities to hold suspects in pretrial
detention for two weeks (with a possible two-week extension) before
bringing them before a judge or informing them of the charges. For crimes
carrying longer potential sentences, detention could last up to 30 days.
There was a functioning bail system, although the courts regularly denied
bail to prodemocracy supporters. Authorities reportedly did not inform
family members or attorneys of arrests in a timely manner.
Incommunicado detention was common. The regime detained politicians,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 9 of 57
election officials, journalists, activists, protesters, and Civil Disobedience
Movement members, refusing to confirm their locations, according to media
reports, eyewitness accounts, and social media posts. In September, the
AAPP reported that an estimated 19,246 individuals listed by the regime as
“under detention” were in unknown locations. Even when the whereabouts
of prisoners were known, prisoners were regularly denied access to lawyers
and family members.
Arbitrary Arrest: There were numerous reports of arbitrary arrest, including
detention by the regime in unknown locations. Since the coup, the AAPP
calculated that regime security forces made nearly 25,000 arrests as of
September 21. According to the NLD Human Rights Documentation Team,
1,172 NLD members were under arrest as of August 22, of whom 73 were
members of parliament and the rest members of the NLD, including 189
women, who served at different levels in various township committees.
On January 17, the regime reportedly arrested a member of the Mandalay
regional parliament, Win Myint Khine, along with his son and two others, in
his home. A regime-associated Telegram post stated that Win Myint Khine
supported the PDF and was in hiding before his arrest.
Pretrial Detention: Arbitrary and lengthy pretrial detention resulted from
lengthy, complicated legal procedures, widespread corruption, and the
regime’s ability to detain persons indefinitely without trial. The regime
removed the right to legal aid services during pretrial detention. Additional
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 10 of 57
changes limited legal aid for stateless persons, asylum seekers, foreigners,
and migrant workers.
Although habeas corpus existed in national law, regime security forces
ignored this right, arresting and detaining individuals without following
proper procedures. Arbitrary arrest or detention remained common to
suppress political dissent, according to the AAPP, and detainees had limited
ability to meaningfully challenge the lawfulness of detention due to the lack
of judicial independence from the regime.
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
Constitutional provisions for an independent judiciary were effectively
suspended. In August, the regime appointed a new chief justice and a new
associate justice of the Supreme Court. Regime appointees occupied nine of
the 10 seats on the Supreme Court.
Judicial corruption was a significant problem. According to NGOs,
eyewitness accounts, and media reports, judicial officials at all levels
received illegal payments at all stages of the legal process for purposes
ranging from influencing routine matters to substantive decisions, such as
fixing the outcome of a case.
Trial Procedures
Regime-declared martial law continued in 50 townships across the country;
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 11 of 57
in those areas military commanders held all judicial (and executive) power.
In martial law courts, defendants had few or no rights, including to legal
counsel and appeal (except in cases involving the death penalty, which could
be appealed to armed forces Commander in Chief Min Aung Hlaing).
Hearings were abbreviated, verdicts were reached within one or two
sessions, and sentences were typically the maximum allowed. Human
Rights Watch (HRW) reported defendants tried before military tribunals
faced almost certain conviction regardless of the evidence against them.
Neither the public, human rights monitors, nor foreign diplomats had access
to the trials. According to data collected by the AAPP, there were 103 post-
coup death row prisoners. At least 119 individuals were sentenced in
absentia, of whom 43 were sentenced to death.
Although no formal changes to trial procedures in civilian courts were made
following the coup, the lack of judicial independence left much to the
interpretation of the regime. The law, which the emergency decree enabled
the regime to ignore, granted broad exceptions to the right to a fair and
public trial, effectively allowing the regime to violate these rights at will.
Trial rights not allowed included: a presumption of innocence; to be
informed promptly of the charges; a fair, timely, and public trial; to
communicate with an attorney of one’s choice (or have one provided at
public expense if unable to pay); adequate time and facilities to prepare a
defense; free assistance of an interpreter; the ability to confront
prosecution or plaintiff witnesses and present witnesses and evidence; to
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 12 of 57
not be compelled to testify or confess guilt; and to appeal.
While the right to counsel remained in the law, many defense lawyers were
unwilling to handle prodemocracy cases due to fear for their personal
safety. In June, HRW found an emerging pattern of intimidation and
harassment against defense lawyers representing political detainees,
reporting many cases of arrests and mistreatment and torture in detention.
According to the AAPP, the regime arrested more than 53 lawyers
associated with prodemocracy cases and 29 lawyers remained in detention
as of August.
Political Prisoners and Detainees
The regime detained and arrested politicians, election officials, journalists,
activists, protesters, religious activists, and Civil Disobedience Movement
members. The AAPP estimated the regime arrested 1,591 persons on
political grounds as of mid-August; in addition, 22,710 persons arrested on
political grounds in previous years (since the coup) remained in detention.
Political prisoners were not always held separately from the prison’s general
population. Many political prisoners were held incommunicado, and there
were numerous reports of political prisoners being denied medical services.
According to local media reports, all political prisoners were vulnerable to
sexual violence and hard labor.
The regime continued to deny political prisoners the right to receive visitors
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 13 of 57
by holding them in institutions far from their homes or by otherwise
imposing extensive restrictions on visits.
Many former political prisoners reportedly remained subject to surveillance
and restrictions, including the inability to secure identity or travel
documents, following their release.
In August, deposed State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi and President Win
Myint received partial pardons. A regime court dismissed five of the 19
cases against Aung San Suu Kyi, reducing her prison sentence from 33 to 27
years. The court voided two of eight convictions against President Win
Myint and reduced his sentence to eight years.
On September 4, Aung San Suu Kyi reportedly experienced gum swelling and
vomiting due to prescribed antibiotics while in prison. The prison
administration rejected the suggestion of an outside dental consultation,
despite the prison’s chief medical officer recommending it.
Aung San Suu Kyi’s trials were closed to the public, and the regime placed a
gag order on her attorneys barring them from communicating with the
public. As of November, Aung San Suu Kyi remained in solitary confinement
at Nay Pyi Taw prison; her legal team applied five times for permission to
meet with her but received no response as of October. The team submitted
appeals in all her cases.
Amnesty: The country traditionally marked Buddhist holidays by granting
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 14 of 57
amnesties to prisoners. According to the AAPP, the regime released an
estimated 2,455 prisoners in four separate amnesties. Among those
released were the former union minister of religious affairs and culture, nine
foreign prisoners including five Sri Lankan nationals, and 2,153 political
prisoners sentenced for terrorism. Corruption, rampant in the criminal
justice system, applied to amnesties as well. Families often bribed prison
authorities to secure a higher position on the “Pardon/Amnesty” list.
Although thousands of prisoners were released in the four amnesties, there
was no reliable data on the number of those amnestied who were detained
on political grounds.
f. Transnational Repression
Extraterritorial Killing, Kidnapping, Forced Returns, or Other Violence or
Threats of Violence: The regime was alleged to have kidnapped persons in
other countries for politically motivated reprisal. According to an HRW
report, on July 4, Burmese Muslim activist Thuzar Maung and her family
were abducted from their home in Malaysia; their whereabouts remained
unknown as of November. HRW stated persons linked to the Malaysian
government could have been involved.
Efforts to Control Mobility: There were credible reports that the regime
attempted to control mobility in reprisal against citizens abroad by revoking
their passports, jeopardizing their legal status. According to an October 30
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 15 of 57
report by Radio Free Asia, the regime canceled the passports of three
Burmese nationals living in Singapore without prior notice or explanation.
Bilateral Pressure: There were credible reports the regime attempted to
pressure the Thai government to impose stricter control on movement
across the border with Burma to undermine the ability of prodemocracy
supporters, including members of the National Unity Government (NUG)
and the Committee Representing the Union Parliament, to depart the
country. On April 1, Thai authorities arrested three members of the Lion
Battalion Commando Column in Mae Sot and handed them over on April 4
to a regime- aligned Border Guard Force in Myawaddy, according to HRW,
which alleged Thai officials colluded with the regime by unlawfully returning
opposition activists, disregarding the dangers they faced in Burma.
g. Property Seizure and Restitution
The 2008 constitution stipulated that the state owned all land, although
there was a limited amount of freehold land. Most land was held in long-
term leases, meaning that while the government owned the land, private
parties could lease it on a long-term basis with a general expectation that
the lease would automatically roll over upon its expiration. The law allowed
for registration and sale of private land ownership rights and provided for
compensation when the government acquired privately held land for a
public purpose; postcoup, however, the situation was unclear. According to
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 16 of 57
the 2008 constitution, the government could declare land unused or
“vacant” and assign it to foreign investors or designate it for other uses.
There was no judicial review of land ownership or confiscation decisions;
administrative bodies subject to regime control made final decisions on land
use and registration. The law did not favor recognition of traditional land
tenure systems (customary tenure).
As of August 16, media reports indicated the regime seized approximately
1,100 properties owned by 892 individuals with ties to the prodemocracy
movement or who provided donations to the prodemocracy movement via
mobile phones. The regime also seized properties belonging to members of
the Committee Representing the Union Parliament, the NUG, or their
families. The regime amended laws to permit extrajudicial seizure of
property owned by defendants, even before charges were filed. According
to the AAPP, the regime used its authority to seize property as a weapon to
intimidate the public.
h. Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Family,
Home, or Correspondence
Although precoup law protected privacy and the security of the home, in
2021 the regime legalized entering properties without a warrant.
Unannounced nighttime household checks were common. The law did not
protect the privacy of correspondence or other communications. The
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 17 of 57
regime regularly monitored private electronic communications through
online surveillance; there were numerous reports the regime monitored
prodemocracy supporters.
According to the July 9 Burma Affairs & Conflict Study, in June and July the
regime conducted biometric data collection training and implemented a
data collection project in towns and cities nationwide. The data collected
included fingerprints, iris patterns, and facial biometrics from registrants
plus personal information such as names, addresses, blood types, and
telephone numbers of citizens ages 10 and older, as well as of foreign
nationals living in the country. Regime news outlets stated the collection
was part of a plan for issuing 10-digit national identification cards. Activists
expressed concern the regime intended to use the biometric data to
increase surveillance.
i. Conflict-related Abuses
Fighting between the regime and opposition forces reportedly intensified in
Kachin, Chin, Karen, Shan, and Kayah States and in Sagaing and Magway
Regions. Reports of killings, disappearances, excessive use of force,
disregard for civilian life, sexual and gender-based violence, and other
abuses committed by regime security forces were common; some ethnic
armed organizations (EAOs) and PDF groups were accused of similar abuses.
Killings: Deliberate killings and deaths due to excessive or unjustified use of
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 18 of 57
force by the regime and some opposition forces were reported. The military
routinely conducted airstrikes that killed civilians and destroyed civilian
infrastructure.
Regime forces engaged in armed conflict with opposition forces failed to
protect noncombatants, resulting in death, injury, and other harm. The
military also routinely conducted airstrikes that killed civilians and destroyed
civilian infrastructure. In June, the UN secretary-general’s 2023 Annual
Report on Children and Armed Conflict recorded 149 child killings (and
numerous other injuries to children) by regime forces in 2022. On April 11,
regime forces reportedly launched aerial attacks that killed more than 160
civilians at Pazigyi village, Kantbalu Township in Sagaing Region, as the
regime’s forces dropped bombs on a gathering; media reported two attacks
by fixed-wing aircraft followed by indiscriminate shooting from helicopters.
On August 3, an abbot in Magwe’s Gangaw District, Tilin Township, was
reportedly shot and killed at his monastery by a resistance member from
Gangaw Battalion 15.
On August 28, the regime reportedly detonated a mine near Shwe Pyi village
in Mandalay’s Singu Township, killing one child and injuring another. Singu
locals said the regime conducted attacks on civilians to put the blame on the
PDF.
Abductions: There were reports of such abuses including on July 16, when
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 19 of 57
drunken regime troops from Infantry Battalion 274 based in Mindat
reportedly abducted a pastor and three church elders from a church in a
residential ward of Mindat town. According to Irrawaddy, all four detainees
were believed to have been killed by regime troops during interrogation. In
November, there were reports of regime forces detaining youths in Rangoon
for conscription or ransom. EAOs in Shan State were also accused of forcible
conscription.
Physical Abuse, Punishment, and Torture: There were reports of such
abuses both by regime and some opposition forces. Local media reported
Lia Do Deih Huai Kum, a woman, age 31, died on September 5 due to severe
head injuries after regime security forces allegedly beat her and a male
friend in Kale Town, Sagaing Region, on August 27. The victim remained
unconscious for 10 days before succumbing to her injuries at a hospital in
Mandalay city.
There were reports of both regime security and opposition forces raping and
sexually assaulting women and girls during security operations.
A June 17 report from the Burmese Women’s Union stated resistance forces
committed four of the 59 rape cases reported to it since the coup; regime
forces were responsible for the majority. Between June 28 and July 31,
Magwe Region’s Saw Township authority reportedly arrested eight
members of the NUG’s People’s Security Force jail guards for repeatedly
raping a woman arrested in April for theft.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 20 of 57
Child Soldiers: The military and some EAOs, including the United Wa State
Army, Kachin Independence Army, the Shan State Progress Party/Shan State
Army, Myanmar National Democratic Alliance Army, Chin National Front,
the Karen National Liberation Army, the Democratic Karen Benevolent
Army, Ta’ang National Liberation Army, and People’s Defense Forces, were
listed in the UN secretary-general’s 2023 Annual Report on Children and
Armed Conflict as having recruited and used children. The report found that
235 children (215 boys and 20 girls) as young as age 12 were recruited and
used as soldiers. There was no evidence the regime or NUG prosecuted
those responsible.
The Secretary of State determined that the regime’s military recruited or
used child soldiers during the reporting period of April 2022 to March 2023.
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Other Conflict-related Abuse: According to numerous local media reports,
UN officials, and NGOs, the regime restricted the passage of relief supplies,
including medical supplies, and access by international humanitarian
organizations to conflict-affected areas, primarily in Mandalay, Sagaing, and
Magway Regions and Rakhine, Chin, Karenni, and Karen States. The UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported humanitarian
access to 82 percent of those displaced by the conflict was considered
“difficult” or “very difficult.”
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 21 of 57
Most access constraints were initiated by de facto authorities and regime
security forces. Local reports indicated military checkpoints often
confiscated aid (e.g., food and medicine) and the delivery of motorbikes
intended for IDPs. According to the UN special rapporteur on human rights,
the regime arrested medical workers and patients, attacked and occupied
hospitals, and blocked the delivery of medicines and medical supplies to
displaced populations.
The military reportedly forced civilians to act as human shields, carry
supplies, or serve in other support roles; human rights organizations
documented the use of villagers as human shields in Karen, Kachin, and Shan
States. According to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
more than 70,000 homes were deliberately burned by the regime since the
coup, most in the northwest. The military reportedly increased airstrikes on
civilians by 141 percent in the second year following the coup, while artillery
shelling of communities, including hospitals, schools, and places of worship,
increased by more than 100 percent.
With the escalation of violence and conflict, an estimated 12 of 14 states
and regions were contaminated by mines.
Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties
a. Freedom of Expression, Including for Members of the
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 22 of 57
Press and Other Media
The regime, by the terms of its emergency decree exempt from respecting
the law, continued its full-scale crackdown on freedom of expression
throughout the year.
Freedom of Expression: Freedom of speech was severely limited. Those
who spoke openly against the regime or in favor of the NLD, NUG, or
democracy more broadly risked abuse and punishment by regime
authorities. The regime used the revised privacy law to allow authorities to
review content on individuals’ cell phones at checkpoints and during
neighborhood raids.
The law stipulated any attempt to “hinder, disturb, damage the motivation,
discipline, health and conduct” of military personnel and government
employees and cause their hatred, disobedience or disloyalty toward the
military and the government was punishable by up to three years in prison.
Under this law, hip-hop singer Byuhar was arrested in May after posting a
video criticizing the regime for prolonged electricity shortages in Rangoon.
Tik Tok celebrity Zaw Win Maung was arrested on the same charges in July
after he posted a short comedy video in which he mocked Commander in
Chief Min Aung Hlaing.
The regime restricted academic speech and freedoms. In October 2022,
regime amendments to education law notably excluded representatives
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 23 of 57
from student unions and teacher unions from participation in the formation
of the National Education Commission. In May, the regime banned political
lectures in conflict with regime policy. The law empowered the Ministry of
Education’s supervisory board to set standards for private schools, issue
teaching licenses, and approve curricula.
On August 31, a military tribunal in Sagaing’s Ye-U Township handed down a
life imprisonment sentence for terrorism to a student named Aye Mya
Sandar. The verdict was based solely on her association with and
attendance at an NUG-affiliated school.
Violence and Harassment: The regime harassed and detained reporters and
subjected them to violent and at times lethal abuse for covering antiregime
protests. According to a November 12 Radio Free Asia report, the regime
revoked at least 14 media outlet licenses and arrested 156 journalists, of
whom approximately 50 remained in detention as of October. Very few
journalists were among amnestied prisoners as of October.
Regime harassment of journalists took many forms, including property
seizure and sexual assaults.
The regime used various laws to harass, imprison, and try journalists,
including those on sedition, which carried a possible 20-year prison term;
laws on unlawful association, which could result in a three-year sentence;
and counterterrorism, which could carry the death penalty.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 24 of 57
In March, Narinjara News and the Border News Agency, two Rakhine-based
media outlets, were accused of “deliberately reporting to disturb the peace”
after reporting regime soldiers demanded money at checkpoints in Rakhine.
Narinjara chief editor Khine Myat Kyaw was charged under the
Telecommunications Act for use of coercive speech.
On September 6, a regime military tribunal sentenced photojournalist Sai
Zaw Thaike of Myanmar Now to 20 years in prison with hard labor for
covering the aftermath of May’s Cyclone Mocha.
Doxing was another form of harassment. Promilitary social media activist
Han Nyein Oo was the most prominent channel on Telegram for doxing
prodemocracy activists. There were reports that regime security forces
often appeared at homes within hours of their targets being doxed on Han’s
channel. Telegram banned the channel several times for violating its
community standards, yet the same doxing cases would reappear a few days
later under a modified username and Han continued to operate in concert
with like-minded channels that often cross-posted content.
Censorship or Content Restrictions for Members of the Press and Other
Media, Including Online Media: After the coup, the regime banned
independent media outlets that did not self-censor reporting on the
prodemocracy movement. The regime also banned the use of certain
terminology in reporting, such as “junta,” “coup d’état,” and “military
council.” Media registered with the regime had to follow these censorship
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 25 of 57
rules.
Ministry of Information instructions required broadcasters and content
providers to Myanmar Radio and Television to self-censor before
broadcasting foreign movies and drama series. In July, the censorship
requirement was extended to locally produced films and television series.
Effective August 1, television broadcasters and producers were required to
submit a brief synopsis of planned movies to the censor board to obtain
permission for production.
In March, the regime announced revisions to the Printing and Publishing
Law that allowed police or a designated Ministry of Information official to
confiscate published material without a court warrant after the published
material was administratively declared unlawful.
Libel/Slander Laws: Even before the coup, the military could and did use
various legal provisions, such as a criminal defamation clause in the
telecommunications law, to restrict freedom of expression.
According to local media, the regime arrested Daw Nyo Aye, a Rakhine
activist and chair of the Rakhine Women’s Network, on August 15 after she
participated in the commemoration of “Rakhine Rice Killing Day.” She was
reportedly indicted under laws against defamation of the state.
Swiss citizen Didier Nusbaumer and 13 Burmese nationals, including a girl,
age 12, were arrested on August 8 for their roles in the film Don’t Expect
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 26 of 57
Anything! released online July 24. Proregime social media channels accused
the film of using language that “insults the morals of the monks and harms
the cultural traditions of Buddhists.”
National Security: Although the regime prosecuted some media critics
using laws specifically related to national security, in general the regime
used other methods to pursue its critics, especially by doxing them through
proxies. The regime maintained its designation of the NUG and other
prodemocracy groups as terrorist organizations. According to the AAPP,
6,700 civilians criticized in state-run newspapers were subsequently
arrested, although some were eventually released without charge.
Internet Freedom
The regime continued to practice zero tolerance of online dissent. The
regime surveilled and censored online content, restricted access to the
internet, and prosecuted its online critics. Precoup law included broad
provisions giving the government the power to block and filter content
“temporarily” for the “benefit of the people.” It did not explicitly allow
forced removal of content or provide for intermediary liability.
According to Freedom House, the regime, the military, and promilitary
groups pressured users to remove antiregime and prodemocracy content.
Regime authorities used, or threatened to use, other provisions of criminal
law to pressure internet users to remove content or face lengthy prison
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 27 of 57
sentences.
Mobile device users were required to provide their names, national
registration documents, birthdays, addresses, citizenship, occupations, and
gender to register a SIM card; noncitizens were required to provide their
passports. Telecommunications companies reportedly required some
subscribers to include information beyond the bounds of the regulations,
including their ethnicity. Telecommunications and internet surveillance
allegedly contributed to violent crackdowns on citizens, including physical
assaults and enforced disappearances in retaliation for online activities.
Throughout the year, proregime social media users conducted “doxing
campaigns” by publishing the legal names and physical addresses of persons
tied to the prodemocracy movement, including children attending online
school. In the year through August, the regime restricted mobile data
network access in 51 townships across the country. Moreover, blocking of
social media websites used by prodemocracy groups, such as Facebook and
Twitter, continued. Authorities allegedly arrested Facebook users found to
have posted content interpreted to be antiregime or used antiregime profile
photographs.
In regions perceived as supportive of the opposition or governed by martial
law, the regime forced telecommunications service providers to restrict
mobile data network speeds, effectively shutting down the internet and
voice communications in some areas. Access Now verified at least seven
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 28 of 57
shutdowns in 2022, affecting all regions at least once, and no internet access
in more than 50 townships for more than a year. Freedom House reported
in its 2023 report on internet freedom in the country that, following the
forced sale of the last two independent internet service providers in 2022,
all service providers were under the direct or indirect control of the military.
The regime maintained a “whitelist” of at least 1,200 approved websites
with local internet service providers and telecommunications companies.
The approved “whitelist” included more than 100 companies in the financial,
delivery service, and entertainment sectors, including Instagram, YouTube,
Netflix, and Tinder. The “whitelist” further specified that some social media
sites were permitted if “used by many customers for business purposes.”
b. Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association
The regime curtailed the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association.
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
The regime maintained a blanket ban on protests and demonstration across
the country that severely impeded activists’ ability to organize and protest.
According to numerous reports in local media, small-scale prodemocracy
protests continued across the country despite violent intimidation and
suppression by regime security forces. Military violence in response to
protests continued throughout the year. On August 8, seven regime soldiers
in civilian clothes reportedly opened fire on six young activists staging a flash
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 29 of 57
protest to commemorate the 35th anniversary of the 1988 prodemocracy
uprising. Three of the activists were arrested; their whereabouts remained
unknown as of December.
Freedom of Association
The regime restricted the right to freedom of association, including by using
arbitrary detentions to prevent the formation of new associations or destroy
old ones perceived to be antiregime. As amended by the regime, the law on
registering organizations stipulated mandatory registration and required a
declaration of funding sources and locations of operation for both local and
international non-profit organizations. Notably, religious, economic, or
political NGOs were subject to separate laws and provisions. Failure to meet
all conditions could result in high fines or up to five years in prison. As of
September, registration procedures were vague, lacked many of the
prescribed mechanisms to facilitate the process, and were interpreted
variously by local officials. Many NGOs argued the law primarily functioned
as a tool for the regime to gather information about non-profit
organizations, including their staff, operations, and activities.
c. Freedom of Religion
See the Department of State’s International Religious Freedom Report at
www.state.gov/religiousfreedomreport/.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 30 of 57
d. Freedom of Movement and the Right to Leave the
Country
The law did not protect freedom of internal movement, foreign travel,
emigration, or repatriation. Local regulations limited the rights of citizens to
settle and reside anywhere in the country. Authorized officials could require
the registration of foreigners’ movements and require foreigners to register
every change of address exceeding 24 hours.
In-country Movement: Regional and local orders, directives, and
instructions restricted freedom of movement. Numerous local media
reports described regime security force roadblocks and random searches of
private cars and taxis. Nightly curfews in Rangoon and several other cities
also restricted movement, as did a requirement that all visitors register with
the local ward administrator. Local media reported the regime harassed
health-care workers and sometime seized ambulances when medical
emergencies occurred after curfew. Due to escalating fighting with the
military, the NUG and EAOs warned civilians to travel only in case of an
emergency in areas affected by violence. COVID-19 mitigation regulations,
at times abused for political or security reasons, also restricted movement.
Limitations on freedom of movement for Rohingya in Rakhine State were
unchanged. Rohingya could not move freely; they were required to obtain
travel authorization to leave their township. The regime’s General
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 31 of 57
Administration Department made it illegal for Rohingya to travel without
permission in Sittwe and Kyauktaw Townships, Rakhine State.
According to Border News Agency, in August the regime restricted the right
of locals to travel in Maungdaw Township in northern Rakhine State. Locals
reported that automobiles and motorcycles were prohibited on the Angu
Maw to Maungdaw highway after 6 p.m.
Foreign Travel: The regime restricted foreign travel by prodemocracy
supporters and expanded measures to increase oversight. All bookings for
departures had to be made at least 10 days in advance and be shared with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The regime also reportedly canceled, or
refused to issue, passports to prodemocracy supporters and required key
business leaders to request advance approval for travel. Numerous
prodemocracy supporters expressed concern for their security and safety if
they tried to leave the country by air. There were confirmed reports of
questioning and limited detention at airports.
e. Protection of Refugees
The regime did not always cooperate with the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) or other humanitarian organizations in
providing protection and assistance to refugees, returning refugees, asylum
seekers, or other persons of concern.
Access to Asylum: The law did not provide for granting asylum or refugee
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 32 of 57
status, and there was no system for providing protection to refugees.
UNHCR did not register any refugees or asylum seekers during the year.
f. Status and Treatment of Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs)
UNHCR estimated that as of November 20, more than two million persons
were internally displaced in the country, either in camps or informally.
More than one million fled their homes since the coup, most notably in
areas such as Sagaing and Magway Regions. Conflicts during the year in
northern Shan State significantly increased the number of IDPs from 6,700
to 71,800 in less than a month. Decades of conflict between the central
government and ethnic communities also contributed to the large number
of IDPs.
On July 12, regime aircraft bombed an IDP camp during airstrikes in Shadaw
and Mese Townships in the resistance stronghold of Kayah State, killing at
least two civilians and sending thousands of refugees across the border into
Thailand’s Mae Hong Son Province. The military’s deliberate destruction of
homes contributed significantly to an increase in the number of IDPs. In
June, local media reported more than 12 instances of displacement across at
least seven townships in Sagaing Region.
UNHCR estimated that nearly all IDPs were living in their own state and
region, principally in Kachin State, Shan State, Northwest Burma (Sagaing
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 33 of 57
Region, Chin State), Rakhine State, Central Burma (Magway Region, Bago
Region), and Southern Burma (Kayah State, Mon State, Kayin, and
Tanintharyi Region). IDPs in Sagaing Region alone numbered 820,880 as of
October, the highest concentration in the country.
The regime systematically obstructed humanitarian relief for IDPs and
denied access to conflict-affected persons affected by natural disasters.
In early January, media reported regime officials forcefully closed 25
temporary IDP settlements near Sittwe in Rakhine State. In early March, the
regime ordered 140 ethnic Rakhine households (532 individuals) to return
from an IDP camp in Ponnakyun Township but offered limited assistance.
On June 8, three weeks after Tropical Cyclone Mocha made landfall in
Rakhine State, the regime revoked approvals to provide assistance to
cyclone-affected populations, to the detriment of approximately 3.4 million
persons in need of humanitarian assistance, according to the United
Nations. The ban followed a letter requiring the United Nations and
international NGOs to hand over all domestic distribution of relief supplies
to regime authorities.
g. Stateless Persons
The country contributed to statelessness, including through discrimination
on grounds of ethnicity and religion, in nationality laws and in their practical
administration, and in the birth registration process.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 34 of 57
The law defined a “national ethnic group” as a racial and ethnic group that
could prove origins in the country dating back to 1823, a year prior to British
colonization, and the regime officially recognized 135 “national ethnic
groups” whose members were automatically granted full citizenship. The
law also established two forms of citizenship short of full citizenship:
associate and naturalized. Citizens in these two categories were unable to
run for political office; form a political party; serve in the military, police, or
public administration; inherit land or money; or pursue certain professional
degrees, such as medicine and law. Only members of the third generation
of associate or naturalized citizens were able to acquire full citizenship.
Rohingya, most of whom were Muslim, were not recognized as a “national
ethnic group,” and the vast majority were stateless as a result. As of
September, up to 630,000 Rohingya were estimated to remain in Rakhine
State. Some Rohingya could have been technically eligible for full
citizenship. The process involved additional official scrutiny and was
complicated by logistical difficulties, including travel restrictions and
significant gaps in understanding the Burmese language. The process also
required substantial bribes to regime officials and, even then, did not result
in equality with other full citizens. In particular, only Rohingya were
required to go through an additional step of applying for the National
Verification Card, through which they received identity documents that
described them as “Bengali.” Regime officials treated Rohingya with the
presumption of noncitizenship, undermining access to public services and
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 35 of 57
contributing to a wide range of societal discrimination.
There were also significant numbers of stateless persons and persons with
undetermined nationality, including persons of Chinese, Indian, and Nepali
descent. Although these latter groups did not face the same level of official
and social discrimination as Rohingya, the regime granted members of these
groups only the lesser rights, and imposed the greater restrictions, of
associate and naturalized citizenship. The regime did not single these
groups out the same way as Rohingya when obtaining citizenship, and the
National Verification Card requirement did not apply to these groups.
The law did not provide any form of citizenship (or associated rights) for
children born in the country whose parents were stateless. The regime
issued birth certificates to Rohingya children born in Rakhine State but did
not grant citizenship.
Media reported that in January and February the regime arrested 2,000
Rohingya from refugee camps in Rakhine and Bangladesh on their way to
Malaysia, with nearly 500 sentenced to two to five years in prison under the
immigration law. In an aid worker’s description, “They left risking their lives,
as they know (sic) they would be free in a new land, if they escape, or they
will just go back to their original lives of failure if they get caught. They have
already anticipated that they could end up like this.”
Section 3. Freedom to Participate in the Political
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 36 of 57
Process
The 2008 constitution provided citizens a limited ability to choose their
government through elections held by secret ballot. The military replaced
the members of the Union Election Commission, which administered
national elections, with regime loyalists and appointed a former military
major general to chair the commission.
Elections and Political Participation
Abuses and Irregularities in Recent Elections: Observers considered the
2020 national elections to be generally reflective of the will of the
population, notwithstanding some structural shortcomings. The NLD won
more than 80 percent of the 1,150 contested seats at the state, regional,
and union levels, including 396 of 476 races for national assembly seats. The
regime delayed an election it promised to hold during the year, citing
violence across the country. Media reported that the regime procured
electronic voting machines modified with Russian assistance; civil society
groups expressed concern that electronic voting machines would make it
easier for the regime to alter election results.
Political Parties and Political Participation: Political parties continued to
face narrowing political space amid regime investigations and threats to ban
them from competing in elections. Political parties not aligned with the
military were denied the rights to assemble and protest peacefully. The
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 37 of 57
regime, moreover, conducted politically motivated investigations into
prodemocracy political parties and their leaders, particularly the NLD.
On January 26, the regime enacted a political party registration law
requiring parties to apply for reregistration with the Union Election
Commission within 60 days or face automatic dissolution. Once the regime
accepted a party’s application for registration or reregistration as a national
party, that party had to amass a minimum of 100,000 members within 90
days of the acceptance, a 100-fold increase from the previous minimum
threshold. Additionally, national-level parties were required to establish
offices in at least half of the country’s 330 townships within six months,
contest at least half of all constituencies, and deposit 100 million kyats
($476,000) with a state-owned bank as registration fees. To register a party
at the state or regional level, the law required 1,000 party members, a one
million kyat ($4,760) deposit in a state-owned bank, and the establishment
of five party offices. State or local parties only had to run a single candidate.
The registration law also forbade anyone convicted of a crime or affiliated
with regime-designated “unlawful associations” from serving as a political
party member, a provision that alone made registration impossible for many
prodemocracy parties.
On March 28, the Union Election Commission used the new law to disband
the NLD and 39 other political parties, including the Shan Nationalities
League for Democracy, Kayah State Democratic Party, Arakan League for
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 38 of 57
Democracy, Chin National League for Democracy, and Ta’ang National Party.
Eight of these 40 dissolved parties collectively won 987 of the 1,161
parliamentary seats contested in the 2020 general election.
On March 31, regime security forces removed signs and flags from the NLD
office in Rangoon’s Kamayut Township. In April, the regime Ministry of
Home Affairs pressured the Shan Nationalities League for Democracy to
remove flags from their offices. On the night of May 8, following vandalism
at the NLD Mandalay regional office, the residence of NLD vice-chairman
Zaw Myint Maung was bombed, with security forces intimidating the local
community with threats and gunfire. In November, the regime removed
NLD signs and flags from Aung San Suu Kyi’s residence.
Participation of Women and Members of Marginalized or Vulnerable
Groups: Laws limiting the citizenship status of many ethnic minority groups
limited their rights to participate in political life. Women and members of
historically marginalized and minority groups continued to be
underrepresented in government.
Section 4. Corruption in Government
The regime-controlled Anti-Corruption Commission continued to target
deposed NLD politicians and other former civilian government leaders for
prosecution under anti-corruption law. As of August, according to the AAPP,
46 former NLD and civilian government officials, Aung San Suu Kyi, and
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 39 of 57
former President Win Myint faced charges under the Anti-Corruption Law.
Most observers considered these charges baseless.
Corruption was widespread in all dimensions of political life, including
especially the judicial system. Petty extortion by police was paralleled by
more serious graft at higher levels, such as demanding bribes from victims
to conduct criminal investigations.
Corruption: The regime used corruption laws almost exclusively against
opponents, as noted. Such cases, which often relied on coerced testimony,
did not provide an accurate picture of actual corruption. On October 7, the
regime’s Supreme Court rejected the appeals on six corruption convictions,
including four related to the Daw Khin Kyi Foundation, a charity. The
remaining two cases involved accusations of receiving cash from a crony.
For additional information about corruption, please see the Department of
State's Investment Climate Statement for the country, and the Department
of State’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report, which includes
information on financial crimes.
Section 5. Governmental Posture Towards
International and Nongovernmental Monitoring and
Investigation of Alleged Abuses of Human Rights
The regime did not allow domestic human rights organizations to function
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 40 of 57
independently or openly and regularly disrupted the routine activities of
numerous NGOs across various sectors. Human rights NGOs continued to
operate but reported harassment, monitoring by authorities, and arbitrary
detention. The regime, for example, sometimes pressured hotels and other
venues not to host meetings organized by activists or civil society groups.
Regime security forces also raided and damaged NGO offices. On July 30,
regime forces raided an All Burma Federation of Student Unions office in
Nyaung Kan village, Budalin Township, Sagaing Region, and killed three
members, including Ko Kyaw Win Thant (chairman), Ko Than Sin Thing (vice
chairman), and Ko Thu Ta Nay (news and information secretary).
The United Nations or Other International Bodies: The regime
systematically denied attempts by the United Nations, other international
organizations, and NGOs to investigate human rights abuses or to access the
locations of alleged abuses. Foreign human rights activists and advocates,
including representatives from international NGOs, such as the International
Labor Organization (ILO), continued to face visa restrictions. Several
international NGOs’ local partners were repeatedly asked to show financial
statements and other documents that revealed their relationship with
foreign funders and some reported unprecedented levels of scrutiny when
withdrawing funds, being asked by their bank for copies of grant
agreements and lists of local partners.
The regime refused to cooperate with or grant access to the Independent
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 41 of 57
Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar created by the UN Human Rights
Council to investigate alleged atrocities in the country.
The regime continued to refuse entry to the UN special rapporteur on the
human rights situation in the country.
Government Human Rights Bodies: The Myanmar National Human Rights
Commission did not, in the view of many organizations and independent
observers, operate as a credible, independent mechanism, despite its
mandate to conduct independent inquiries on alleged human rights abuses.
According to the Asian NGO Network on National Human Rights Institutions’
2023 report, the commission was complicit “in the junta’s grave human
rights violations and atrocit[ies]” and “aligned … with the military junta.”
Section 6. Discrimination and Societal Abuses
Women
Rape and Domestic Violence: Rape of women and men was illegal but
remained a significant problem, as the regime did not enforce the law
effectively and reports emerged of sexual abuse of women in prisons by
security guards. Rape of a woman outside of marriage carried a maximum
sentence of 20 years in prison. Spousal rape was not a crime unless the wife
was younger than the legal age of marriage (which could vary according to
ethnicity or religion), the penalty for which was a maximum of two years in
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 42 of 57
prison. The law prohibited committing bodily harm against another person,
but there were no laws specifically against domestic violence or spousal
abuse unless the wife was younger than the legal age of marriage.
Overlapping and at times contradictory legal provisions complicated
implementation of these limited protections.
Domestic violence against women, including spousal abuse, remained a
serious problem. Abuse within families was prevalent and considered
socially acceptable. Spousal abuse or domestic violence was difficult to
measure because the regime did not maintain comprehensive statistics and
survivors typically did not report it. According to the Global Protection
Cluster, a coalition of NGOs and UN agencies, gender-based violence
increased since the coup as economic opportunities shrank, and tensions
rose in households over hunger and poverty. Forty percent of persons in
IDP households reported fear of sexual violence or harassment.
Other Forms of Gender-based Violence or Harassment: The law prohibited
sexual harassment and prescribed a maximum penalty of two years in prison
if the harassment involved physical contact. Harassment was punishable by
a fine or up to one year in prison. The regime did not report information on
the prevalence of the problem, and many of these crimes were unreported.
NGOs reported regime police investigators were not sensitive to survivors
and rarely followed through with investigations or prosecutions.
Discrimination: By law women enjoyed the same legal status and rights as
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 43 of 57
men, including property and inheritance rights and religious and personal
status, but regime officials did not enforce the law. Communities around
the country implemented customary law to address matters of marriage,
property, and inheritance that differed from the provisions of statutory law
and was often discriminatory against women.
The law required equal pay for equal work, but the formal sector did not
respect this requirement, and the regime did not actively enforce it.
Women remained underrepresented in most traditionally male-dominated
occupations (forestry, carpentry, masonry, and fishing) and were effectively
barred from them by hiring practices and cultural barriers rooted in male
dominance. The law governing hiring of civil service personnel stated that
nothing should prevent the appointment of men to “positions that are
suitable for men only,” with no further definition of what constituted
positions “suitable for men only.” The law restricted the ability of Buddhist
women to marry non-Buddhist men by requiring public notice prior to any
such marriage and allowing objections to the marriage to be raised in court.
The law was generally ignored and rarely enforced.
Reproductive Rights: There were no reports of coerced abortion or
involuntary sterilization on the part of regime authorities. The law
permitted the government to impose coercive birth-spacing requirements –
36 months between children – if the president or national government
designated “special regions” for health care based on factors such as
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 44 of 57
population, migration rate, natural resources, birth rates, and food
availability. In such special regions, the government could create special
health-care organizations to establish family planning regulations. The
regime did not designate any such special region. In Rakhine State,
however, local authorities imposed regulations that prohibited Rohingya
families from having more than two children, although the regulations were
not enforced.
The law otherwise limited the right of individuals to manage their
reproductive health. Access to sexual and reproductive health services,
including emergency contraception for sexual violence survivors through
public and private facilities, was very limited and further exacerbated by the
collapse of the public health system after the coup.
The World Bank estimated in 2020 that the maternal mortality rate
nationwide was 179 deaths per 100,000 live births. NGOs regularly reported
throughout the year that humanitarian access and movement restrictions
among Rohingya limited access to health-care services and contributed to
maternal mortality rates in Rakhine State higher than the national average.
Complications resulting from unsafe abortions were also a leading cause of
maternal deaths.
Other major factors influencing maternal mortality included poverty; the
high rate of home births; limited availability of and access to comprehensive
sexual and reproductive health services and information, including
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 45 of 57
contraception, and maternal and newborn health services; low coverage of
antenatal care visits; and the lack of access to services from appropriately
trained and skilled birth attendants and other trained community health
workers. Delivery of these services was likely affected by significant staffing
gaps in the public-sector health workforce.
Systemic Racial or Ethnic Violence and Discrimination
Wide-ranging institutional and societal discrimination against members of
minority groups persisted, including in areas such as education, housing,
employment, and access to health services. Members of ethnic minority
groups constituted 30 to 40 percent of the population. The seven ethnic
minority states comprised approximately 60 percent of the national
territory, and a significant number of minority members also resided in
majority ethnic Burmese regions. Rohingya continued to face severe
discrimination based on their ethnicity and religion. The regime and private
actors reportedly practiced discrimination that impeded Muslim-owned
businesses’ operations and undercut their ability to hire and retain labor,
maintain proper working standards, and secure public and private contracts.
Children
Birth Registration: There were significant rural-urban disparities in birth
registration, with an informal or almost nonexistent process in small, rural
villages. Birth registration was required to obtain a national identification
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 46 of 57
card, and it could provide important protections for children, particularly
against child labor, early marriage, and underage recruitment into the
armed forces and ethnic armed groups.
Education: By law education was compulsory, free, and universal through
the fourth grade (up to age 10). This left children ages 10 through 13
vulnerable to child labor, since they were not required to attend school and
were not legally permitted to work (the minimum age for work was 14).
Burmese was the mandatory language of instruction in public schools. The
national education plan did not allow for other languages of instruction,
although some public schools taught ethnic languages as extra subjects.
Schools were often unavailable in remote communities and conflict areas,
and access to them for internally displaced and stateless children was also
limited.
Child Abuse: The laws were neither adequate to deter child abuse nor
enforced. There were no reliable data on child abuse.
Child, Early, and Forced Marriage: The law stipulated different minimum
ages for marriage based on religion and gender. The minimum age for
Buddhists was 18, while the minimum age for non-Buddhists was 16 for boys
and 15 for girls. Child marriage occurred, especially in rural areas. There
were no reliable statistics on forced marriage.
Sexual Exploitation of Children: The 2022 Anti Trafficking in Persons Law
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 47 of 57
criminalized all forms of labor and sex trafficking. It stated that when
trafficking involved the sexual exploitation of a child, it was not necessary to
demonstrate the use of force, fraud, or coercion to prove guilt. The law also
barred adoption by deception, included measures consistent with the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and defined a child as a person
younger than 18. Other law criminalized physical or sexual violence against
children, but there were no reports on its implementation as of October.
Prohibitions on the commercial sexual exploitation of children included
pimping; separate legal provisions prohibited sex with a child younger than
14. The penalty for the purchase of commercial sex acts from a child
younger than 18 was 10 years in prison. The law prohibited child
pornography and specified a minimum penalty of two years’ imprisonment
and a modest fine. The law on child rights prescribed a penalty of one to
seven years in prison, a substantial fine, or both, for sex trafficking and
forced marriage. If a survivor was younger than 14, the law considered any
sexual act to constitute statutory rape. The maximum sentence for
statutory rape was two years in prison when the survivor was between ages
12 and 14, and 10 years to life in prison when the survivor was younger than
12. The Bangkok-based NGO End Child Prostitution in Asian Tourism cited a
lack of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms as well as of publicly
available data sufficient to ascertain the effectiveness of implementation.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 48 of 57
Antisemitism
There was one synagogue in Rangoon serving a very small and primarily
expatriate Jewish population. There were no reports of antisemitic
incidents.
Trafficking in Persons
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
Acts of Violence, Criminalization, and Other Abuses Based
on Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity or Expression, or
Sex Characteristics
Criminalization: Consensual sexual activity “against the order of nature”
was a criminal offense, punishable by up to 20 years in prison and a fine. In
addition, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex (LGBTQI+)
persons were sometimes subjected to detention or threatened with arrest
under section 35 of the Police Act, which punished persons found between
sunset and sunrise with their “face covered or otherwise disguised.”
Violence and Harassment: Reports of violence against LGBTQI+ persons
persisted. According to media reports, eyewitness accounts, and social
media posts, regime officials deliberately humiliated LGBTQI+ prodemocracy
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 49 of 57
supporters after their arrest, employing tactics such as sexual insults, taunts,
mocking of clothing, and physical abuse at rates greater than those endured
by other prisoners. According to Amnesty International, the regime often
subjected members of the LGBTQI+ community to thorough body checks to,
as one detainee said, “ensure whether they are males or females.”
Several media reported the June 29 conviction of Justin Min Hein, president
of the LGBTQI+ Union Mandalay, for violating the Counter-Terrorism Act.
The LGBTQI+ Union Mandalay had documented and publicized the sexual
assault against a transgender prisoner in Monywa Prison. Justin Min Hein
was reportedly beaten and denied food and water while awaiting trial in the
Yay Kyi Ai Interrogation Center after his 2022 arrest. Sue Sha Shinn Thant,
another LGBTQI+ activist from Mandalay Region, was sentenced to more
than 20 years in prison in 2022 for incitement, murder, and terrorist acts
and was reportedly sexually assaulted during interrogation.
Discrimination: The 2008 constitution did not recognize sexual orientation
as a ground for nondiscrimination. The law did not recognize same-sex
marriage or grant LGBTQI+ couples and their families rights equal to the
rights of other persons. Stigma and a lack of acceptance among the general
population of LGBTQI+ persons persisted. There were reports of
discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity in
employment. Many LGBTQI+ individuals reportedly faced barriers to
education and employment if they were vocal or visible about their status.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 50 of 57
LGBTQI+ persons reported facing discrimination from health-care providers,
including public shaming. The local diplomatic community observed that
some members of the LGBTQI+ community were denied access to HIV
treatment while in prison.
Availability of Legal Gender Recognition: There was no mechanism for legal
gender recognition or to change the gender assigned at birth on civil or
identification documents.
Involuntary or Coercive Medical or Psychological Practices: There were no
confirmed cases of so-called conversion therapy practices or medically
unnecessary and irreversible “normalization” surgeries on children or
nonconsenting intersex persons, nor were these practices banned.
Restrictions of Freedom of Expression, Association, or Peaceful Assembly:
The regime did not permit LGBTQI+ persons or groups to participate in
LGBTQI+ related public events, although members of the community
continued to support the prodemocracy movement, including participation
in flash protests.
Persons with Disabilities
The law prohibited discrimination against persons with physical, sensory,
intellectual, and mental disabilities. While the law required job protection,
equal access to education, and access to public transportation, there was no
meaningful enforcement.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 51 of 57
According to the Eden Center for Disabled Children, in the school year the
majority of children with disabilities, particularly of those in rural and border
areas, did not attend school; very few special education schools were
available in urban areas.
Numerous individuals suffered disability due to conflict and landmines,
especially in remote border areas. According to monitors of landmine and
other unexploded weaponry incidents, as of July 556 casualties were
reported nationwide. Rehabilitation and other support services for these
persons were in short supply.
Other Societal Violence or Discrimination
Official and societal violence and discrimination, including employment
discrimination, against persons with HIV continued. Reports of abuse
included verbal insults, harassment, threats, and physical assault. Significant
legal, social, and financial barriers impeded access to services for persons
with HIV. These barriers included stigma, unhelpful gender norms, poor
infrastructure, and political instability. Laws criminalizing behaviors that
increased the risk of acquiring HIV fueled stigma and discrimination against
persons engaged in these behaviors and impeded their access to HIV
prevention, treatment, and care services.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 52 of 57
Section 7. Worker Rights
a. Freedom of Association and the Right to Collective
Bargaining
The regime committed extensive abuses against organized labor, including
extrajudicial killings of union leaders and members and unlawful detention
for exercising their fundamental freedoms and human rights. Labor laws
often went unenforced or were enforced primarily against organized labor
and labor activists and in the interests of business owners and the regime.
The military maintained its designation of at least 16 labor unions as illegal
and continued to issue arrest warrants for union leaders. There were
numerous reported raids of trade union offices and union leaders’ homes.
The law promised the right of workers to form and join independent unions,
bargain collectively, and conduct strikes; however, the regime, by the terms
of the emergency decree, de facto abolished these rights, declaring all major
independent labor organizations illegal. The law permitted labor
organizations recognized by the regime to demand the reinstatement of
workers dismissed for union activity, but it did not explicitly prohibit
antiunion discrimination in the form of demotions or mandatory transfers.
The law did not provide adequate protection for workers from dismissal
before a union was officially registered. The law prohibited civil servants
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 53 of 57
and personnel of the security services and police from forming unions. The
law permitted workers to join unions only within their category of trade or
activity, and the definition of trade or activity lacked clarity. Basic labor
organizations were required to have a minimum of 30 workers and register
through township registrars via the Chief Registrar’s Office of the regime
Ministry of Labor. The law provided unions recognized by the regime the
right to represent workers, to negotiate and bargain collectively with
employers, and to send representatives to a conciliation body or tribunal.
There were no labor unions recognized by the regime apart from seafarers,
who worked abroad, and regime-sponsored “yellow” unions.
The law provided the right to strike in most sectors with significant
restrictions. The law prohibited strikes addressing problems not directly
relevant to labor matters. The law did not permit strikes or lockouts in
essential services such as water, electricity, or health. The military
continued to threaten criminal charges against public-sector workers who,
during strikes, did not return to work.
Penalties for violations of related labor laws were commensurate with those
for other laws involving denials of civil rights. Penalties were never applied
against violators.
Worker organizations reported that formal dispute settlement and court
procedures were not effective at enforcing labor laws.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 54 of 57
There were reports that employers dismissed union leaders with impunity
and military support. In June, the military threatened and arrested seven
garment factory workers for demanding a pay raise in Shwe Pyi Thar
Industrial Zone in Rangoon Region. While by law labor disputes should be
heard in civilian courts, a military court tried those arrested on the grounds
that the factory was in a township under martial law.
The military regime maintained martial law over two major industrial zones
located in Hlain Thar Yar and Shwe Pyi Thar Townships, Rangoon Region,
and other townships with a high concentration of industrial and
manufacturing enterprises. Labor representatives alleged that some
employers hired military-affiliated security guards to harass and intimidate
workers, sometimes leading to fatal violence when disputes arose.
The Confederation of Trade Unions in Myanmar reported the arrest and
harassment of trade unionists by regime security forces. On June 26, Thet
Hnin Aung, general secretary of Myanmar Industry Crafts & Services Trade
Unions Federation, was released after two years’ detention by military
authorities. The ILO reported on July 12 that he was rearrested for unknown
reasons and his whereabouts were unknown.
Military authorities continued to interfere in the operations of the ILO
country office through the imposition of banking restrictions, denial of visa
extensions for ILO officials, and refusal to conclude a memorandum of
understanding on tax exemptions and other privileges and immunities for
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 55 of 57
the ILO office and staff. A senior-level ILO Commission of Inquiry report on
October 4 called upon the regime to cease violence, torture, and other
inhumane treatment against trade unionists and to end forced or
compulsory labor.
b. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
See the Department of State’s annual Trafficking in Persons Report at
https://www.state.gov/trafficking-in-persons-report/.
c. Prohibition of Child Labor and Minimum Age for
Employment
See the Department of Labor’s Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor at
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/resources/reports/child-labor/findings/.
d. Discrimination (see section 6)
e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
Wage and Hour Laws: The official minimum daily wage was above the
poverty line, although the official poverty line had not been adjusted since
2019. The minimum wage covered all sectors and industries in the formal
sector for businesses with more than 15 employees. The law required the
minimum wage to be revised every two years, although it was last revised in
2018.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 56 of 57
The workweek was 44 hours per week for factories. For shops and other
establishments, it was 48 hours per week. Although the law in general
stated that overtime should not exceed 12 hours per work week for shops,
the law allowed up to 16 hours of overtime when special matters required
additional overtime. Overtime for factory workers was limited to 20 hours
per week. The law also stipulated an employee’s total working hours could
not exceed 11 hours per day (including overtime and a one-hour break).
Wage and overtime laws did not apply to those in the informal sector or
self-employed.
The Business and Human Rights Resource Center noted in April that workers
at various garment factories were not receiving minimum wages or were
being forced to work excess hours.
Occupational Safety and Health: The law set standards for occupational
safety and health (OSH) that were appropriate for the main industries. The
regime Ministry of Labor had the authority to suspend businesses operating
at risk to worker health and safety until these risks were remediated.
The regime often ignored workers’ OSH complaints. Labor unions reported
instances in which workers could not remove themselves from situations
that endangered their health or safety without jeopardizing their
employment. Such violations were commonly seen in the construction
sector.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor

Page 57 of 57
Wage, Hour, and OSH Enforcement: The regime Ministry of Labor’s
Factories and General Labor Laws Inspection Department oversaw labor
conditions in the private sector. Inspectors were authorized to make
unannounced inspections and initiate sanctions.
Although penalties for wage and hour violations were commensurate with
those for similar violations such as fraud, the regime did not effectively
enforce the law. Penalties for similar violations, such as employer
negligence, were rarely applied. The number of labor law inspectors and
factory inspectors was insufficient to address wage, salary, overtime, OSH
standards, and other matters adequately. In some sectors, other regime
ministries regulated OSH laws (e.g., the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
and Irrigation).
Informal-sector jobs usually lacked basic benefits such as social and legal
protections. In at-risk industries – defined as having occupational hazards,
volatile pay structures, and ease in exploiting labor rights – 20 percent of
workers on average had an informal work arrangement, although the
proportion was even higher in manufacturing, construction, recreation, and
personal services.
Although no recent data were available, experts believed a large majority of
workers were in the informal sector. Wage, hour, and OSH laws did not
apply to those in the informal sector or self-employed.
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2023
United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor